
                               1 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                     October 17, 2013 Thursday 6:12 AM GMT

Edward Snowden's father says he has more secrets to share;
Edward Snowden's father advises the former NSA worker to stay in Russia and away
from the US

BYLINE: By Reuters

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 411 words


The father of Edward Snowden said on Wednesday that the former US spy agency
contractor has more secrets to share and should stay in Russia "to make sure the
true story is told."

Father Lon Snowden spoke at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York
shortly after returning to the United States from a weeklong visit with his son
in Moscow.

It was the first time they saw one another since Edward Snowden, an ex-National
Security Agency contractor, was given temporary asylum in Russia earlier this
year after leaking sensitive data on U.S. security agencies' operations.

Asked what he told his son during the visit, Snowden told reporters: "To stay,
but that's my advice. It's not necessarily what my son will do. He's
comfortable. He's happy. And he's absolutely committed to what he has done."

The younger Snowden's revelations about the reach and methods of the NSA,
including the monitoring of vast volumes of Internet traffic and phone records,
have upset US allies from Germany to Brazil. Admirers call him a human rights
champion and critics denounce him as a traitor.

"There's much more to be shared," Lon Snowden said.

Staying in Russia, Snowden said, allows his son "to continue to push these
issues forward, to make sure the true story is told."

"He's not a fugitive. He's a legal asylee of the Russian Federation and the
press needs to get that right and I think our government understands that at
this point."

Snowden criticised the US intelligence community as being negligent and
complicit in the spying scandal, singling out Director of National Intelligence
James Clapper, NSA Director Keith Alexander, Senator Diane Feinstein, who chairs
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, and Congressman Mike Rogers, who
chairs the House Intelligence Committee.

Russia has kept secret where the Snowdens met during the visit as well as where
the son has been living. Moscow also has kept the media and public away from
Edward Snowden, who has been shepherded by a lawyer believed to have ties with
Russia's secret services.

Russian President Vladimir Putin, a former KGB spy, has repeatedly said that
Russia would shelter Snowden only if he stopped harming the United States. But
he has used the case to accuse Washington of preaching to the world about rights
it does not uphold at home.

Lon Snowden's flight home left from Sheremetyevo, the airport where his son
spent nearly two months in the international zone before getting temporarily
asylum in August.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               3 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           October 16, 2013 Wednesday

Father "very satisfied" with Russia's treatment of NSA leaker Snowden - lawyer

LENGTH: 231 words


Lon Snowden, the father of fugitive former US intelligence contractor Edward
Snowden, is "very satisfied" with the treatment of his son in Russia, Anatoliy
Kucherena, lawyer with links to the Kremlin has said.

Interfax news agency quoted Kucherena saying: "Snowden Sr is very satisfied with
how he was received in Russia and with the attitude towards his son." "He still
loves his son very much, thinks that he is an absolutely honest man, who did the
right thing. He will continue to support his son," Kucherena said.

We "exchanged gifts" before Lon Snowden's departure, said Kucherena. "Lonnie
gave us two bottles of wine; we gave him vodka and English translation of Gogol
and Saltykov-Shchedrin."

Lon Snowden spent several days in Russia during which he met his son and gave
interviews to the Russian media.

RIA Novosti news agency quoted Kucherena saying that Lon "intends to return to
Russia". Lon Snowden liked Russians, he thought they are not what they are
portrayed to be in the United States, Kucherena said of Lon Snowden according to
RIA Novosti.

Kucherena said that the "issue" of Edward Snowden's employment would be sorted
"in the near future", but the "issue" of Russian citizenship for him has not
been discussed yet, RIA Novosti reported.

Sources: Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1135 gmt 16 Oct 13; RIA
Novosti news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1053, 1106 gmt 16 Oct 13

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                               4 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                           October 12, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Defiant whitleblowers back Snowden

BYLINE: Raf Sanchez; in Washington

SECTION: A; Pg. A014

LENGTH: 496  words


Defiant whitleblowers back Snowden UNDERCOVER: Edward Snowden, centre, with his
whistleblowing award, surrounded by former CIA and FBI operatives in Moscow.
Photo: Getty Images By Raf Sanchez in Washington Edward Snowden has posed
defiantly for a photograph in Moscow with former CIA and FBI operatives, who
said the fugitive leaker had no regrets about revealing classified intelligence.

The secret meeting on Wednesday is thought to have been his first face- to-face
contact with fellow Americans since he was granted asylum in Russia in August,
as he fled from espionage charges in his home country.

The picture was made public as his father, Lon Snowden, arrived in Moscow to see
his son for the first time since he fled the US in May, saying he hoped "to
learn more about his circumstances, his health and to discuss legal options".

The younger Snowden was given a whistleblowing award by the Sam Adams Associates
for Integrity in Intelligence, a transparency group named after a CIA analyst
who challenged America's official account of the Vietnam War.

The award for Mr Snowden had been formally announced in July but was presented
to him on Wednesday by four former US officials who also defied their
government. Among them was Thomas Drake, a former analyst at the National
Security Agency, who like Mr Snowden was charged with espionage after disclosing
agency secrets. The charges against Mr Drake were eventually dropped.

Mr Drake said Mr Snowden had shown no regrets and "is making the best of his
circumstances and is living as normally as possible".

Mr Drake was joined by Coleen Rowley, a former FBI agent who disclosed the
bureau's mishandling of information before the September11 attacks in 2001, and
Jesselyn Radack, a Department of Justice official who challenged the
interrogation of an American who fought for the Taliban.

Ray McGovern, a retired CIA officer who has become a sharp critic of the US, was
also present.

The four Americans told their story on Thursday in a 15-minute program on the RT
channel, which is financed by the Kremlin and broadcasts its point of view.

Lon Snowden met reporters in the company of Anatoly Kucherena, Mr Snowden's
Kremlin-connected lawyer, and sped from the airport to an appearance on the main
Russian television channel, also controlled by the Kremlin.

"I'm Mr Kucherena's guest," Lon Snowden said, "and I'm very thankful for his
hospitality, and I'm going to follow Mr Kucherena's advice and that will
determine where my day leads."

The photograph is the first picture of Mr Snowden since a press conference he
held at Sheremetyevo airport in July.

His father arrived at the same airport, where he said he was unsure if he would
be able to see his son.

"My hope is to learn more about his circumstances, his health and to discuss
legal options," said the elder Mr Snowden.

He said his son was not continuing to leak information from Moscow and he was
"simply trying to remain healthy and safe".

The Telegraph, London, Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


       Copyright 2013 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               5 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           October 12, 2013 Saturday

Alert on Snowden was never sent on;
N.S.A. was uninformed about derogatory report and suspicions at C.I.A.

BYLINE: ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1363 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

ABSTRACT

When Edward J. Snowden worked as a C.I.A. technician in 2009, he was suspected
of trying to break into classified files, but a report was never sent to the
N.S.A., which later used him as a contractor.

FULL TEXT

Just as Edward J. Snowden was preparing to leave Geneva and a job as a C.I.A.
technician in 2009, his supervisor wrote a derogatory report in his personnel
file, noting a distinct change in the young man's behavior and work habits, as
well as a troubling suspicion.

The C.I.A. suspected that Mr. Snowden was trying to break into classified
computer files he was not authorized to access and decided to send him home,
according to two senior American officials.

But the red flags went unheeded. Mr. Snowden left the C.I.A. to become a
contractor for the National Security Agency. Four years later he leaked
thousands of classified documents. The supervisor's cautionary note and the
C.I.A.'s suspicions were never forwarded to the N.S.A. or its contractors and
surfaced only after federal investigators began combing through Mr. Snowden's
record once the documents began spilling out, intelligence and law enforcement
officials said.

''It slipped through the cracks,'' one veteran law enforcement official said of
the report.

Spokesmen for the C.I.A., N.S.A. and F.B.I. all declined to comment on the
precise nature of the warning and why it was not forwarded, citing the
investigation into Mr. Snowden's activities.

Half a dozen law enforcement, intelligence and Congressional officials with
direct knowledge of the supervisor's report were contacted for this article. All
of the officials agreed to speak on the condition of anonymity because of the
criminal investigation.

In hindsight, officials said, the report by the C.I.A. supervisor and the
agency's suspicions may have been the first serious warnings of the danger to
come, and the biggest missed opportunity to review Mr. Snowden's top-secret
clearance or at least put his future work at the N.S.A. under much greater
scrutiny.

''The weakness of the system was if derogatory information came in, he could
still keep his security clearance and move to another job, and the information
wasn't passed on,'' said a Republican lawmaker who has been briefed on Mr.
Snowden's activities.

Mr. Snowden now lives in Moscow, where he surfaced this past week for the first
time since receiving temporary asylum from the Russian government over the
summer. On Wednesday night he met with four American whistle-blowers who have
championed his case in the United States and who presented him with an award
they said was given annually by a group of retired C.I.A. officers to members of
the intelligence community ''who exhibit integrity in intelligence.''

In a television interview, one member of the group, Jesselyn Radack, a former
Justice Department official, said that Mr. Snowden ''looked great.''

''He seemed very centered and brilliant,'' Ms. Radack said. ''Smart, funny, very
engaged. I thought he looked very well.''

Another of the whistle-blowers, Coleen Rowley, a former F.B.I. agent who
testified before the Senate about missteps in the agency's investigation of the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, said, ''We talked about prior examples of great people
in history that had themselves been under this kind of pressure, and he's
remarkably centered.''

On Thursday, Mr. Snowden's father, Lon, arrived in Moscow to see his son after
assurances from Mr. Snowden's legal aide that there would be ''no
complications'' in organizing a meeting with his father. But in a telephone
interview later in the day, Lon Snowden said he had not yet been able to meet
with his son.

''I can't tell you the where and the when,'' Lon Snowden said. ''I have no idea.
I hope something happens.''

It is difficult to tell what would have happened had N.S.A. supervisors been
made aware of the warning the C.I.A. issued Mr. Snowden in what is called a
''derog'' in federal personnel policy parlance.

''The spectrum of things in your personnel file could be A to Z,'' said Charles
B. Sowell, who until June was a top official in the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence working on improving the security clearance process.
''There's a chance that that information could be missed and might not be
surfaced.''

Mr. Sowell, now a senior vice president at Salient Federal Solutions, an
information technology company in Fairfax, Virginia, emphasized that he left the
government before Mr. Snowden's disclosures became public.

Intelligence and law enforcement officials said the report could have affected
the assignments Mr. Snowden was given, first as an N.S.A. contractor with the
computer company Dell in Japan and later with Booz Allen Hamilton in Hawaii, as
well as the level of supervision he received.

The electronic systems the C.I.A. and N.S.A. use to manage the security
clearances for its full-time and contracted employees are designed to track
major rule-based infractions, not less serious complaints about personal
behavior, a senior law enforcement official said. Thus, lesser derogatory
information about Mr. Snowden was unlikely to have been given to the N.S.A.
unless it was specifically requested. As a result of Mr. Snowden's case, two law
enforcement officials said, that flaw has since been corrected and such
information is now being pushed forward.

The revelation of the C.I.A.'s derogatory report came as Congress is examining
the process of granting security clearances, particularly by USIS, a company
that has performed 700,000 yearly security checks for the government. Among the
individuals the company vetted were Mr. Snowden and Aaron Alexis, who the police
say shot and killed 12 people at the Washington Navy Yard last month.

''We have a compelling need to monitor those trusted with this sensitive
information on a more regular basis and with broader sets of data,'' said Kathy
Pherson, a former C.I.A. security officer who belongs to an intelligence
industry task force that is expected to issue a report on the matter by year's
end.

While it is unclear what exactly the supervisor's negative report said, it
coincides with a period of Mr. Snowden's life in 2009 when he was a prolific
online commenter on government and security issues, complained about civil
surveillance and, according to a friend, was suffering ''a crisis of
conscience.''

Mr. Snowden landed an information technology job at the C.I.A. in mid-2006.
Despite his lack of formal credentials, he gained a top-secret clearance and a
choice job under State Department cover in Geneva. Little is known about what
his duties were there.

Mavanee Anderson, who worked with Mr. Snowden in Geneva and also had a high
security clearance, said in an article in The Chattanooga Times Free Press of
Tennessee in June that when they worked from 2007 through early 2009, Mr.
Snowden ''was already experiencing a crisis of conscience of sorts.''

''Anyone smart enough to be involved in the type of work he does, who is privy
to the type of information to which he was privy, will have at least moments
like these,'' she said.

Later, Mr. Snowden would tell The Guardian, a British newspaper, that he was
shocked and saddened by some of the techniques C.I.A. operatives in Geneva used
to recruit sources. ''Much of what I saw in Geneva really disillusioned me about
how my government functions and what its impact is in the world,'' he told The
Guardian. ''I realized that I was part of something that was doing far more harm
than good.''

There were other signs that have since drawn investigators' attention. In early
2009, someone using Mr. Snowden's screen name expressed outrage at government
officials who leaked information to the news media, telling a friend in an
Internet chat that leakers ''should be shot.''

''They're just like WikiLeaks,'' Mr. Snowden - or someone identified as him from
his screen name, ''TheTrueHOOHA,'' and other details - wrote in January 2009
about an article in The New York Times on secret exchanges between Israel and
the United States about Iran's nuclear program.

He later he told The Guardian he was disappointed that President Obama had
''advanced the very policies that I thought would be reined in.''

''I got hardened,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                               6 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 12, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Says It Did Not Have Early Suspicions About Snowden

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 456 words


WASHINGTON -- The C.I.A. said Friday that it did not suspect Edward J. Snowden
of gaining access to computer files without authorization when he was working as
a technician for the agency in Geneva in 2009, and did not send him home as a
result.

The New York Times reported Thursday that Mr. Snowden's supervisor in Geneva
wrote a derogatory report in his personnel file, noting a distinct change in the
young man's behavior and work habits, as well as a troubling suspicion about how
he was using his computer.

The Times cited two senior American officials with direct knowledge of the
episode who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the continuing
criminal inquiry into thousands of classified documents Mr. Snowden leaked four
years later, when he was a contractor for the National Security Agency.

Asked repeatedly for comment over the past several weeks, most recently on
Thursday, the C.I.A. declined. But on Friday, the C.I.A. responded with a
statement, the first public acknowledgment that Mr. Snowden had worked for the
agency.

''The C.I.A did not file any report on Snowden indicating that it suspected he
was trying to break into classified computer files to which he did not have
authorized access while he was employed at the C.I.A., nor was he returned home
from an overseas assignment because of such concerns,'' Todd Ebitz, an agency
spokesman, said in the statement.

In dispute is what Mr. Snowden did on his computer, and the agency's response to
it. The two officials cited by The Times said the C.I.A. suspected Mr. Snowden
was trying to gain access to classified computer files he was not authorized to
view. But other officials on Friday characterized the activity as much less
serious, not involving potential security violations.

It was unclear why there was a divergence of opinion.

These officials on Friday also said that Mr. Snowden left the C.I.A. of his own
volition. But had he remained with the agency in Geneva, they said, Mr. Snowden
faced a potentially time-consuming and critical internal inquiry prompted by his
supervisor's report, an investigation that was halted once he quit the C.I.A. in
2009 to join the N.S.A. as a contract employee at a military facility in Japan.

In his statement, Mr. Ebitz did not dispute the existence of the supervisor's
derogatory report or its mention of a disturbing shift in Mr. Snowden's behavior
as he was preparing to leave the agency he had joined in 2006 for a new job as a
contractor for the National Security Agency. He also did not dispute that the
supervisor's cautionary note was not forwarded to the N.S.A. or its contractors,
and surfaced only after federal investigators began scrutinizing Mr. Snowden's
record once the documents began spilling out.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/12/us/cia-disputes-early-suspicions-on-
snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Edward J. Snowden

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            October 11, 2013 Friday

Snowden's father, visiting Russia, doubts son's return

BYLINE: ANDREW ROTH

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

Lon Snowden, who lives in Pennsylvania, arrived on Thursday in Moscow to visit
his son, Edward, the fugitive National Security Agency contractor who has
temporary asylum in Russia.,

FULL TEXT

After fleeing his home in Hawaii for Hong Kong, then spending a month as
resident of an airport transit zone in Moscow before winning temporary asylum in
Russia, the fugitive National Security Agency contractor Edward J. Snowden is
getting a visit from his father.

Lon Snowden, who lives in Pennsylvania, arrived on Thursday morning at
Sheremetyevo Airport - which the younger Mr. Snowden called home for over a
month - and told a waiting Russian television crew that he had had no direct
contact with his son since June.

Mr. Snowden said he did not expect his son to return to the United States, where
he is wanted on espionage charges, and did not give any indication that he would
try to persuade his son to do so.

''I'm not sure that my son will be returning to the U.S. again,'' Mr. Snowden
said. ''That's his decision you know. He's an adult.''

Russia's agreement to give Mr. Snowden refuge added further tension to a
relationship with the United States that has been deeply strained in recent
months, and it was a major factor in a decision by the White House to cancel a
planned summit meeting between President Obama and President Vladimir V. Putin
that had been scheduled in early September.

In recent weeks, however, Mr. Snowden has been less of a factor as officials
seem focused on a joint effort to disarm Syria of chemical weapons.

Meanwhile, disclosures about American surveillance programs based on information
obtained by Mr. Snowden using his national security clearance have continued to
appear in news publications. Those disclosures have been coordinated by
associates of Mr. Snowden, including Glenn Greenwald, a columnist for The
Guardian who had also suggested that he might visit Edward Snowden in Russia.

Lon Snowden added that he had come to Russia as a guest of Anatoly G. Kucherena,
Edward Snowden's legal aide in Russia. To obtain a visa to Russia, which is
required for American citizens, visitors must have an invitation that can be
provided by a hotel or by a private individual.

The younger Mr. Snowden, who is 30 and gained worldwide notice by exposing
details of American surveillance programs and has presented himself as a
champion of openness and transparency, has become largely a cipher himself since
obtaining temporary asylum in Russia in August.

Although Mr. Snowden is said to be living in or near Moscow, he has virtually
disappeared.

One Russian news agency published a photograph this week that it said was of Mr.
Snowden pushing a shopping cart full of grocery bags from a supermarket. The
agency, Life News, said it had purchased the photo from the person who had taken
it and had not interviewed Mr. Snowden or learned of his whereabouts.

Mr. Snowden's location and movements appear to be coordinated with the Russian
government, if not controlled by officials.

Mr. Kucherena is known to be close to the Kremlin, and the coordination seemed
to be confirmed by the ability of state news media crews with ties to the
government to meet Lon Snowden at the airport. The elder Mr. Snowden confirmed
several weeks ago that he was in the process of obtaining a Russian visa and
intended to visit his son, but his precise travel plans had not been disclosed.

At the airport, Mr. Snowden said he was eager to see his son and consult with
Mr. Kucherena.

''I'm his father,'' he said. ''I love my son and again I'm here to meet with Mr.
Kucherena and learn more about my son's situation and if the opportunity
presents itself I certainly hope that I'll have an opportunity to see my son.''

Mr. Snowden also said his son had ceased leaking information, a condition of his
stay in Russia imposed by Mr. Putin in public remarks.

''Since he has been in Russia, my understanding is, he's simply trying to keep
healthy and safe and he has nothing to do with future stories,'' Mr. Snowden
said.

Mr. Kucherena has said in interviews that Mr. Snowden spends his time traveling
around Russia in disguise, reading Russian literature and learning basic phrases
in Russian.

Asked how he felt about being in Russia, Mr. Snowden said he felt ''extreme
gratitude that my son is safe and secure and he's free.''

Mr. Snowden also expressed his gratitude to the Russian people and Mr. Putin for
the support they have provided his son ''in terms of keeping him safe and
secure.''

At the same time, he acknowledged that his authority, like that of any parent of
an adult child, is extremely limited.

''I cannot speak for my son,'' he said before Mr. Kucherena whisked him back
into the airport terminal.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                               8 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 11, 2013 Friday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Noted American whistle-blowers honor Snowden;
The NSA leaker receives an Integrity in Intelligence award and meets three
previous recipients.

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


Edward Snowden met in Moscow this week with four Americans, three of whom had
acted as whistle-blowers during their careers, the group told journalists
Thursday.

Former CIA analyst Ray McGovern, former NSA senior executive Thomas Andrews
Drake, former FBI agent Coleen Rowley and Jesselyn Radack from the Government
Accountability Project met Wednesday with the fugitive American to give the
former National Secur- ity Agency contractor the Sam Adams Award for Integrity
in Intelligence, an English-language Russian news program reported.

"The irony is that the U.S. has abandoned the rule of law," Drake said on the
program Thursday.

"They've unchained itself from their own Constitution, the mechanism by which we
govern ourselves," he said. "And when you ban the real law and use a secret law
and secret interpretations of law, we're in a whole new ball game. It's a
Pandora's box."

Snowden "is doing remarkably well under the circumstances in which he came
here," Drake said.

"I thought he looked great," Radack added.

Snowden, wanted by U.S. officials for leaking documents about the NSA's
extensive tracking of communications around the globe, arrived at Moscow's
Sheremetyevo International Airport on June 23 on a flight from Hong Kong,
reportedly hoping to reach a Latin American country that would give him asylum.

McGovern said Snowden "is convinced that what he did was right. He has no
regrets, and he is willing to face what the future holds for him."

The prize was awarded to Snowden two months ago, McGovern said, but the
opportunity to deliver it to him in person was delayed.

"It is a candlestick holder for someone who has shone bright light into dark
corners," he said.

The visitors did not disclose Snowden's whereabouts.

The Sam Adams Award, named after a Vietnam War-era CIA analyst, is given out
each year by the Sam Adams Associates for Integrity in Intelligence, a group of
retired intelligence officers. It is awarded, in the group's words, to
"truth-tellers" among the intelligence community. Drake, Rowley and Radack are
previous honorees.

Separately, Snowden's father, Lon, arrived in Moscow to visit with the fugitive,
though it was not immediately clear when and where their meeting would occur.

"I have no idea what his intentions are, but ever since he has been in Russia,
my understanding is that he has simply been trying to remain healthy and safe
and he has nothing to do with future stories," the elder Snowden told reporters
at the Moscow airport.

Edward Snowden's lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, said his client's safety remains the
main concern.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: LON SNOWDEN, Edward's father, is interviewed in Moscow. He came
to visit his fugitive son, but details on when and where were unclear.
PHOTOGRAPHER:Rossiya 24 / AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                               9 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 11, 2013 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Snowden's Father Arrives in Moscow

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROTH

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1007 words


MOSCOW -- After fleeing his home in Hawaii for Hong Kong, then spending a month
as resident of an airport transit zone in Moscow before winning temporary asylum
in Russia, Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive American intelligence contractor, is
getting a visit from his father.

Lon Snowden, who lives in Pennsylvania, arrived on Thursday morning at
Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow -- the place the younger Mr. Snowden called home
for more than a month -- where he told a waiting Russian television crew that he
had had no direct contact with his son since June.

Mr. Snowden said he did not expect his son to return to the United States, where
the younger Mr. Snowden, 30, is wanted on espionage charges, and gave no
indication that he would try to persuade him to do so.

''I'm not sure that my son will be returning to the U.S. again,'' Mr. Snowden
said. ''That's his decision, you know. He's an adult.''

A Russian lawyer accompanying Lon Snowden, Anatoly Kucherena, said that Mr.
Snowden would meet his son later on Thursday. ''There are no limitations on
Edward,'' he said. ''But it won't be made public. This is tied to concerns about
safety.''

Details emerged Thursday of a secret meeting held on the eve of Mr. Snowden's
arrival between four former national security officials and the younger Mr.
Snowden in Moscow.

The Wednesday evening meeting with the former officials, members of the Sam
Adams Associates for Integrity in Intelligence, during which Mr. Snowden was
presented an award for ''truth telling,'' was believed to be the first time Mr.
Snowden has met with American citizens since his arrival in Russia in June.

Shortly after the WikiLeaks organization disclosed Thursday afternoon that the
meeting had taken place, the Russian government-financed RT television station
broadcast an interview with the former officials -- Coleen Rowley, Thomas
Andrews Drake, Ray McGovern, Jesselyn Radack -- all whistle-blowers, from the
National Security Agency, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence
Agency and Department of Justice.

Ms. Radack, a former Department of Justice official who accused the F.B.I. of
ethics violations, said that Mr. Snowden ''looked great.''

''He seemed very centered and brilliant. Smart, funny, very engaged,'' Ms.
Radack said. ''I thought he looked very well.''

Ms. Rowley, a former F.B.I. agent who testified before the Senate about missteps
in the agency's investigation of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, said, ''We
talked about prior examples of great people in history that had themselves been
under this kind of pressure, and he's remarkably centered.''

Russia's agreement to give Mr. Snowden refuge added further tension to a
relationship with the United States that has been deeply strained in recent
months, and it was a major factor in a decision by the White House to cancel a
planned summit meeting between President Obama and President Vladimir V. Putin
that had been scheduled for early September. In recent weeks, however, Mr.
Snowden has been less of a factor, as officials from the two countries seem to
be focused on a joint effort to disarm Syria of chemical weapons.

Meanwhile, disclosures about American surveillance programs based on information
obtained by Mr. Snowden using his national security clearance have continued to
appear in news publications. Those disclosures have been coordinated by
associates of Mr. Snowden, including Glenn Greenwald, a columnist for The
Guardian, who had also suggested that he might visit Mr. Snowden in Russia.

Lon Snowden said that he had come to Russia as a guest of Mr. Kucherena, Edward
Snowden's lawyer in Russia. To obtain a visa to Russia, which is required for
American citizens, visitors must have an invitation that can be provided by a
hotel or a private individual.

The younger Mr. Snowden, who won worldwide notice by exposing details of
American surveillance programs and has presented himself as a champion of
openness and transparency, has become largely a cipher himself since obtaining
temporary asylum in Russia in August.

Although he is said to be living in or near Moscow, he has virtually
disappeared. One Russian news agency published a photograph this week that it
said was of Mr. Snowden pushing a shopping cart full of grocery bags from a
supermarket. The agency, Life News, said it had bought the photo from the
photographer and had not interviewed Mr. Snowden or learned of his whereabouts.

Mr. Snowden's location and movements appear to be coordinated with the Russian
government, if not controlled by officials. Mr. Kucherena is known to be close
to the Kremlin, and the coordination seemed to be confirmed by the ability of
state media crews with ties to the government to meet Lon Snowden at the
airport. Mr. Snowden confirmed several weeks ago that he was obtaining a Russian
visa and intended to visit his son, but his precise travel plans had not been
disclosed.

At the airport, Mr. Snowden said he was eager to see his son and consult with
Mr. Kucherena.

''I'm his father,'' he said. ''I love my son and again I'm here to meet with Mr.
Kucherena and learn more about my son's situation, and if the opportunity
presents itself I certainly hope that I'll have an opportunity to see my son.''

Mr. Snowden also said his son had ceased leaking information, a condition of his
stay in Russia imposed by Mr. Putin in public remarks.

''Since he has been in Russia, my understanding is, he's simply trying to keep
healthy and safe and he has nothing to do with future stories,'' Mr. Snowden
said.

Mr. Kucherena has said in interviews that Mr. Snowden spends his time traveling
around Russia in disguise, reading Russian literature and learning basic phrases
in Russian.

Asked how he felt about being on Russian soil, Mr. Snowden said he felt
''extreme gratitude that my son is safe and secure and he's free.''

At the same time, he acknowledged that his authority, like that of any parent of
an adult child, was extremely limited.

''I cannot speak for my son,'' he said, before Mr. Kucherena whisked him back
into the airport terminal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/11/world/europe/snowden
-father-moscow-visit.html

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 11, 2013 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. whistleblowers honor Snowden in Moscow visit

BYLINE: Kathy Lally

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - Edward Snowden burst back into the limelight Thursday after four
whistleblower advocates from the United States met with him to give him an award
and his father arrived here for the first time since his son received asylum.
Through it all, the fugitive remained out of public view.

The four activists, who said they met Snowden on Wednesday, gave him an award
for truth-telling on behalf of Sam Adams Associates for Integrity in
Intelligence, an organization of former national security officials. They
ridiculed U.S. government assertions that Snowden has caused grave damage to
national security.

The United States has charged Snowden under the Espionage Act for revealing
secrets that he had access to as a contractor for the National Security Agency.
"Integrity must trump blind loyalty," countered Coleen Rowley, a former FBI
agent who was at the meeting, thought to be Snowden's first with visitors.

The encounter and the separate arrival of his father suggested that Snowden
remained under the tight control of Russian authorities. He has not been seen
since he left Sheremetyevo International Airport on Aug. 1.

The four Americans told their story Thursday in a 15-minute program on the RT
channel, which is financed by the Kremlin and broadcasts its point of view.
Snowden's father, Lon, met with reporters in the company of Anatoly Kucherena,
Snowden's Kremlin-connected attorney, and sped from the airport to an appearance
on the main Russian television channel, also controlled by the Kremlin.

"I'm Mr. Kucherena's guest," Lon Snowden said, "and I'm very thankful for his
hospitality, and I'm going to follow Mr. Kucherena's advice - and that will
determine where my day leads."

Lon Snowden acknowledged that Julian Assange and the anti-secrecy group
WikiLeaks had helped arrange his travel here, and the four Americans said Sarah
Harrison, an Assange aide, remained with Snowden in refuge.

Kucherena declined to reveal any details about a meeting between father and son,
saying that security concerns were paramount and suggesting that the United
States might somehow take action if it knew Edward Snowden's whereabouts. "We
need to understand he is America's most wanted man," the lawyer said.

State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf said the U.S. reaction "is the same it's
always been - Mr. Snowden needs to return to the United States to face these
charges."

The Sam Adams award was announced in July but presented in person Wednesday. It
honors Snowden as a whistleblower, a description that the United States deems
wrong. U.S. officials contend that whistleblowers reveal information after
efforts to go through official channels are ignored. Snowden, they say, made no
such efforts before leaking secrets, forfeiting whistleblower protections.

Thomas Drake, a former NSA executive who became a critic of the agency, said
Snowden spoke truth to power.

"Russia, to its credit, recognized international law and granted him asylum,"
Drake said, asserting that U.S. officials drove Snowden into Russia's arms by
making him stateless. The United States points out that Snowden remains a
citizen even though his passport was revoked and that he should return home to
answer the charges against him.

"This is an extraordinary person," said Ray McGovern, a former CIA analyst.
"He's convinced what he did was right."

"I thought he looked great," said Jesselyn Radack, who once accused the FBI of
ethics violations and now defends whistleblowers for the Government
Accountability Project. She said the United States has presented no evidence
that Snowden had harmed national security.

"We weren't worried about coming into your country," she told a Russian TV host.
"We're worried about getting back into ours."

Later Thursday, the Americans said in an interview that they met with Snowden
for about five hours, including at a private ceremony and an elegant dinner
afterward. Radack said the meeting took place at "what appeared to be a hotel"
in Moscow.

All in all, the group said, Snowden appeared to be in good spirits. He is
learning Russian and studying literature, the members said.

Radack said the group asked Snowden whether he would do it all over again. His
reply: "Absolutely," she said.

Snowden has been on the run since May, leaving his home in Hawaii and turning up
in Hong Kong, then fleeing to Moscow on June 23, spending five weeks hiding in
the airport, where his father arrived Thursday.

"I've had no direct contact with my son despite previous reports," Lon Snowden
told reporters gathered outside the airport. "If the opportunity presents
itself, I certainly hope I'll be able to meet my son."

Kucherena told reporters that the son was running out of money.

"What he really needs to do today is find a job, and I hope he can do that in
the nearest future," the lawyer said. "He could get a job in IT or maybe human
rights. But we haven't decided yet."

He said it was natural that Snowden has not been seen. "This is because he is
being persecuted by a huge power, the U.S. government," he said. "This anger
persists, and we understand this very well."

Speculation has been rife about why Snowden has remained in Russia. Authorities
here say he could not travel onward because the United States revoked his
passport, although Russia could have provided him with travel documents if it
had so desired.

"I'm here to learn more about my son's situation," Lon Snowden said, "and I'm
thankful, extremely thankful, to the Russian people, President Vladimir Putin
and Mr. Kucherena and his staff for their help in keeping my son safe and
secure."

He said he doubted that his son would return to the United States but said it
was up to him.

"I'm his father," he said. "I love my son."

kathy.lally@washpost.com

Ellen Nakashima in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              12 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                     October 10, 2013 Thursday 2:22 PM GMT

NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden's father arrives in Moscow;
Lon Snowden expresses gratitude to Russia and Putin for providing safe haven to
the NSA whistleblower

BYLINE: Joseph Charlton

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 356 words


The father of US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden has arrived in Moscow,
telling a Russian television channel that he hoped to meet with his fugitive son
"if the opportunity present itself".

Arriving at Sheremetyevo airport after an early flight from New York, Lon
Snowden told state television channel Rossiya 24 that he was "extremely
thankful... to the Russian people and President Vladimir Putin" for providing
safety and security to his son.

Lon Snowden said in recent months he had had no direct contact with his son, and
had "no idea what his intentions are".

Looking tired and weary from the flight, Snowden senior told reporters: "I'm not
sure that my son will be returning to the US. That's his decision, he's an
adult."

Edward Snowden, who fled a possible 30-year prison sentence for leaking damaging
information about US surveillance programs, was allegedly captured on camera
while shopping in Moscow earlier this week.

The goateed, back-pack wearing man was thought by some to be identifiable as the
former US intelligence contractor because the grey shirt pictured was similar to
the one Snowden wore in his interviews with the Guardian earlier this year.

Yesterday Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger defended publishing the secret files
supplied to him by Edward Snowden, saying his newspaper could conceivably put
similar documents out in the open in the future.

Lon Snowden, a retired military officer now living in Pennsylvania, has not
spurned public appearances since his son left the US to seek asylum abroad.

In a June interview with Fox News, Snowden senior said that he would rather see
his son face jail in the US than walk free in a country without American
liberties.

But later the ex-coastal guard's anguish turned to dissilusion with the US
government. In July, he told the Washington Times  that he was "an American
citizen who has lost faith in many of the leaders on both sides of the political
aisle."

Earlier today Edward Snowden missed out on a top European human rights prize he
was nominated for. Lawmakers from the EU presented the (EURO)50,000 (£42,000)
award to Pakistani teenage activist Malala Yousafzai.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              14 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                     October 10, 2013 Thursday 12:19 PM GMT

NSA leaks: Edward Snowden's father Lon arrives in Moscow to see fugitive son

BYLINE: Steve Gutterman

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 363 words


Former US spy agency contractor Edward Snowden's father arrived in Moscow on
Thursday to see his son, who was granted asylum in Russia after he leaked
details of government surveillance programmes and fled the United States.

Speaking at the same Moscow airport where his fugitive son was stranded for
weeks this summer, Lon Snowden said he had no direct contact with Edward Snowden
but that he felt "extreme gratitude that my son is safe and secure and he's
free".

The younger Snowden, 30, is wanted in the United States on espionage charges and
Russia's decision to grant him temporary asylum aggravated already tense
relations between Moscow and Washington.

Russian authorities and the Russian lawyer who is assisting Snowden, Anatoly
Kucherena, have not disclosed his location.

"I am not sure my son will be returning to the U.S. again. That's his decision,
he is an adult, he is a person who is responsible for his own agency," Lon
Snowden said, standing beside Kucherena at Sheremetyevo airport.

"I am his father, I love my son and I certainly hope I will have an opportunity
to see my son," Snowden said.

Edward Snowden was the source of disclosures about US government surveillance
that included details about a program that collected e-mails, chat logs and
other types of data from companies such as Google and Facebook.

"I really have no idea what his intentions are," Lon Snowden said, citing his
lack of direct contact with him.

But he said he believed Snowden had not been involved in the publication of any
information since he arrived in Russia and was "simply trying to remain healthy
and safe".

Directly from the airport, he and the lawyer drove to a state television studio
to give an exclusive live interview, indicating the visit was under strong
government control.

Kucherena, who said he last saw Edward Snowden on Wednesday, expressed hope the
former intelligence contractor would soon find a job in Russia - possibly in IT
or human rights sector - because he has largely run out of his savings and was
living modestly, mainly of donations.

He also said the fugitive American lived under security in Russia and was
avoiding publicity because of the US hunt for him.

Reuters

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              17 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                    October 10, 2013 Thursday 04:43 PM GMT+4

Edward Snowden looks forward to seeing his father "who has many kilometers to
travel yet"-lawyer

LENGTH: 233 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW October 10


- Edward Snowden's father who arrived in Russia by air on Thursday is to meet
his son later in the day," but he has many kilometers to travel yet before the
two will meet," Anatoly Kucherena, a lawyer for the ex-CIA worker Edward Snowden
, told Itar-Tass.

Lon Snowden arrived in Russia on the lawyer's personal invitation, Kucherena
said. He arrived for a few days. Lon Snowden is in Russia for the first time,
and the lawyer prepared "an itinerary" for the elder Snowden to enable him to
meet his son and learn more about Russia.

After Lon Snowden's visit to Russia other relatives of Edward Snowden might in a
short while visit him in Russia, Kucherena said.

"But we would not like to do again what we did on Thursday when we had to change
three cars after we had walked out of Sheremetyevo airport to escape pursuit,"
Kucherena said. "Actually, we were followed by five cars, which was very
unpleasant indeed," he stressed.

Earlier, Lon Snowden said in an interview with Rossiya-24 television that he did
not know where his son was staying.

The 30- year old Edward Snowden is an American computer specialist and a former
CIA and NSA employee who intentionally disclosed classified details of several
top-secret United States and British government mass surveillance programs to
the press.

He was granted temporary asylum in Russia after he had stayed at Sheremetyevo
transit zone for more than a month.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              18 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                    October 10, 2013 Thursday 01:51 PM GMT+4

Lon Snowden arrives in Moscow and hopes to see his son today

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW October 10


- Lon Snowden, father of former CIA employee Edward Snowden, has arrived in
Russia earlier today for a meeting with his son. They may see each other later
today, said Snowden Jr.'s lawyer Anatoly Kucherena.

He said Lon Snowden was happy at the opportunity to visit Moscow and see his son
at last. Kucherena added Snowden Sr. "will spend some time in Moscow and do some
sightseeing as this is the first time he is in Moscow."

In an interview to the Rossiya 24 round-the-clock TV news channel Lon Snowden
said he was unaware of his son's whereabouts yet.

Kucherena said Edward Snowden's safety was number one priority at the moment.

"We meet whenever the need arises, when he asks me, when he has some questions,"
Kucherena said. He recalled that when Lon Snowden and he were on the way to
Moscow from Sheremetyevo airport, five unknown cars followed them.

"We did not know who was in those cars. All this is very alarming," Kucherena
said.

Certain risks for Edward Snowden remain.

"He leads a secluded life, because he is persecuted by the US government. The
risks are still there," Kucherena believes.

Snowden Sr. described his son as a talented and educated man and expressed hope
he would settle in Russia. He added he was happy his son had been granted a
temporary asylum and thanked President Vladimir Putin and the Russian people.

Kucherena said Snowden Jr. had received many employment offers and voiced
confidence he would find a job and a well-paid one. Snowden is still undecided
regarding his future occupation and is considering either IT or human rights
activities.

Edward Snowden is now studying Russian and has made certain progress. Kucherena
reiterated he had brought Snowden books by some Russian literature classics,
like Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and noted his willingness to read and learn.

He added Russia had received no official requests for extradition.

Edward Snowden, 30, who is charged with leaking secret data about the US
National Security Agency's (NSA) global surveillance programme, was granted a
temporary asylum in Russia after over a month in Sheremetyevo airport's transit
limbo.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              19 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           October 10, 2013 Thursday

Edward Snowden's father arrives in Moscow

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 229 words


MOSCOW (AP) The father of former National Security Agency systems analyst Edward
Snowden arrived in Moscow Thursday morning to meet with his son who has received
asylum in Russia and has been living at a secret location.

Lon Snowden told Russian television outside Moscow's airport that he doubts his
son, Edward Snowden, will return to the United States, where he is charged with
violating the Espionage Act for disclosing NSA's highly classified surveillance
of phone and Internet usage around the world.

"I'm not sure that my son will be returning to the U.S. again," Lon Snowden said
but added that "that's his decision." He also said he has not had direct contact
with his son and would not say when or where he will be meeting him.

Edward Snowden was stuck at a Moscow airport for more than a month after his
arrival from Hong Kong on June 23. He was granted asylum in Russia in August.
His whereabouts remain secret although his lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, insists
that Snowden lives in Russia.

Lon Snowden said that it is his understanding that his son has now stopped
leaking information.

He thanked Russia and President Vladimir Putin for sheltering his son.

Edward Snowden's asylum status has strained the already tense relationship
between the U.S. and Russia, and President Barack Obama called off a meeting
with President Putin at a Russia-hosted summit in September.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              20 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                     October 10, 2013 Thursday 8:52 AM GMT

Edward Snowden's father arrives in Moscow to visit fugitive son;
Intelligence leaker Edward Snowden's father has arrived in Moscow hoping to meet
his son for the first time since the latter became a fugitive.

BYLINE: By AFP

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 477 words


Lon Snowden arrived at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, where his son had spent
more than a month in transit limbo before Moscow agreed to grant him temporary
asylum in August.

"I'm here to learn more about my son's situation," he told journalists at the
airport. "My hope is to learn more about his circumstances and his health and to
discuss legal options."

"If the opportunity presents itself, I certainly hope that I have the
opportunity to see my son," Lon Snowden said in televised remarks.

He was met at the airport by Snowden's Russian lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, who
said he will be hosting Lon Snowden as his "guest". Kucherena said they have not
yet decided how long the elder Snowden will stay in the country.

Lon Snowden said he had had no direct contact with his son in recent months, and
said he didn't yet know what his plans were. "I really have no idea what his
intentions are," he said.

"I'm not sure that my son will be returning to the US," he told journalists.
"That's his decision, he's an adult."

He said he believed his son is not leaking information from Moscow. "Edward
Snowden, since he has been in Russia, is simply trying to remain healthy and
safe," the father said.

"I have extreme gratitude that my son is safe, secure, and free" in Russia, he
said, repeating that he believed his son to be a "whistleblower" rather than a
criminal.

The visit of Lon Snowden, a US Coast Guard veteran who lives in Pennsylvania,
was long mulled, and he reportedly received a Russian visa in August.

He had told US media in July that he was approached by the FBI with an offer to
fly to Russia in order to persuade Edward Snowden to come home but refused due
to uncertainty about whether he would have direct communication with his son.

Kucherena said Thursday that Snowden will meet with his father soon, but that
the date and place will be kept secret. He also said that Snowden's mother was
also interested in coming to Russia.

"As far as the arrival of other relatives, there is such interest, but it will
be decided later," Kucherena said.

Snowden flew in to Moscow on June 23 from Hong Kong with a revoked US passport
and remained in the transit area for weeks, as Russia mulled US requests to hand
him over.

He finally walked out of the airport on August 1 after obtaining temporary
asylum in Russia despite protests from Washington and has remained underground
ever since.

On Monday a tabloid Russian website LifeNews published a blurry photograph of a
man it said was Snowden rolling a cart of groceries out of a supermarket.

The 30-year-old former National Security Agency contractor is wanted by the
United States after revealing to the media details of massive domestic and
foreign surveillance programmes operated by the secretive agency.

His lawyer Kucherena has said he is living in a secret location in fear of being
tracked down by the United States.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              21 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                    August 28, 2013 Wednesday 11:28 PM GMT+4

Duma speaker calls Snowden Don Quixote facing death for rights activities

LENGTH: 716 words

DATELINE: BRATISLAVA August 28


- State Duma speaker Sergei Naryshkin said U.S. National Security Agency leaker
Edward Snowden was Don Quixote who was facing a death penalty for an attempt to
protect the rights of millions of people.

"You know that I compare him [Snowden] with Cervantes' hero Don Quixote.
Actually, Snowden has something in common with him: he is just as naive, noble
and unselfish," Naryshkin said in an interview with Slovak television on
Wednesday, August 28, during his official visit to Bratislava.

But unlike Don Quixote, who fought windmills, Snowden is fighting "violations
committed by the state system," Naryshkin said, adding that he was doing this
for no reward.

"How can he be called a spy? He did not cooperate with the Slovak, Russian,
French or Chinese intelligence service. Was he fulfilling someone's order? No,
he wasn't. He did that because of his own convictions that the rights of
millions of people on our planet must be protected. And he did just that," the
speaker said.

He thinks those who call Snowden a spy who has divulged U.S. national secrets
are wrong. "I think that's not so. I am sure of that. What information did
Edward Snowden make public? It was not information about the location of U.S.
military units in Afghanistan or Iraq, codes, secret keys or plans for some
future military operations. He told the public that the United States, security
services and the state were watching a large number of people, hundreds of
millions of people not only in the U.S. but around the world and thus violated
fundamental human rights," Naryshkin said.

One can hardly consider treason the fact that Snowden made public information
about the crimes committed by the American military, including in Iraq, he
added.

Moscow gave Snowden temporary asylum because the "state that calls itself the
leader of democracy and the main defender of human rights in the world still has
and uses such a penalty as capital punishment."

"We understand that Edward Snowden would have faced this penalty had he ended up
in the U.S. or any other state. This is why we thought it impossible to
extradite him," the Duma speaker said.

He stressed that the asylum granted to Snowden was temporary not political and
had been given on condition that Snowden "will no longer take any steps against
the United States that would complicate our partnership with America."

The Obama administration continues to insist on Snowden's return to the United
States for trial and assured the audience that it would be a fair trial.

U.S. Department of State Deputy Spokesperson Marie Harf said that the Russian
authorities' decision to grant temporary asylum to Snowden was "an extremely
disappointing step." She said the U.S. authorities "continue to press with the
Russian Government that Mr. Snowden needs to be returned to the United States
where he will face a free and fair trial."

Harf stressed that "this move by the Russian Government undermines a
longstanding record of law enforcement cooperation, particularly since the
Boston Marathon bombings. So we will continue to make that point with the
Russian Government at all points in this process."

She said "Mr. Snowden is wanted on very serious charges and that he needs to be
returned to the United States to face those charges."

The U.S. administration regretted Russia's "disappointing decision" to grant
Snowden temporary asylum and said it was also "a factor that we considered in
assessing the current state of our bilateral relationship."

U.S. Deputy National Security Affairs Ben Rhodes said the decision to give
temporary asylum to Snowden had further complicated the already complex
relations between the two countries.

Edward Snowden arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport from Hong Kong on June 23 and was
staying in its transition zone until the beginning of August. He applied for
temporary asylum in Russia.

Prior to that he had passed to the press information about mass electronic
surveillance by the U.S. authorities under the PRISM programme and claimed that
American security services watched and recorded people's actions and
conversations even if they did nothing wrong.

He said security services were gathering information primarily about the users
of popular search servers and social networks.

On August 1, Snowden was granted temporary asylum in Russia for one year.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              22 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       August 26, 2013 Monday 3:45 PM GMT

Edward Snowden 'contacted Kremlin before arriving in Moscow';
Edward Snowden contacted the Russian authorities long before he arrived in
Moscow, suggesting a much closer degree of cooperation between the intelligence
defector and the Kremin than previously thought, a newspaper in Russia has
claimed.

BYLINE: By Roland Oliphant in Moscow

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 374 words


Mr Snowden approached the Russians days before he left Hong Kong on a
Moscow-bound Aeroflot flight on June 23, and spent at least two nights in the
Russian embassy before he boarded the flight, the Kommersant newspaper reported
on Monday, citing sources "in Snowden's circle".

According to the paper, the former American National Security Agency employee
even celebrated his 30th birthday at the Russian diplomatic office in the Sun
Hung Kai skyscraper on June 21.

If true, the reports belie Russian claims that Mr Snowden's arrival in Moscow's
Sheremetyevo airport came as a "complete surprise" and raise fresh questions
about the degree of cooperation between him, the Kremlin and WikiLeaks, which
has been providing the defector with legal assistance.

A Russian government source confirmed that Mr Snowden had spent two days at the
consulate, but insisted that he had approached the Russians on his own
initiative after buying a ticket to Havana via Moscow.

"It was his choice of route [to Latin America via Moscow], and his request for
help was entirely unexpected," the source said.

Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, said in June that his arrival at Moscow's
Sheremetyevo airport came "as a complete surprise to us," and the Russian
foreign ministry has repeatedly insisted that the "situation around Snowden [is
one that] we did not create."

Western diplomats are now said to be convinced that the Russians approached
Snowden themselves, extending an invitation via the Chinese.

After Russia granted Mr Snowden asylum earlier this month Barack Obama, the
American president, cancelled a meeting with Mr Putin to express anger at
Russia's "Cold War mentality".

The new revelations that the intelligence defector contacted Russia will harden
America's position and damage Mr Snowden's case to be a "whistleblower" acting
in the public interest.

The Russian government source said that Snowden became trapped at Sheremetyevo
because Cuba bowed to American pressure and threatened to close its airspace to
the Aeroflot flight on which he was booked if Snowden was on board.

Dozens of journalists searching for the fugitive intelligence analyst booked
seats on the Aeroflot flight to Cuba on June 24, but Mr Snowden's seat - 17A -
remained empty.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              23 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                            August 24, 2013 Saturday

Snowden suspected of covering electronic tracks

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 774 words


WASHINGTON (AP) The U.S. government"s efforts to determine which highly
classified materials leaker Edward Snowden took from the National Security
Agency have been frustrated by Snowden"s sophisticated efforts to cover his
digital trail by deleting or bypassing electronic logs, government officials
told The Associated Press. Such logs would have showed what information Snowden
viewed or downloaded.

The government"s forensic investigation is wrestling with Snowden"s apparent
ability to defeat safeguards established to monitor and deter people looking at
information without proper permission, said the officials, who spoke on
condition of anonymity because they weren"t authorized to discuss the sensitive
developments publicly.

In July, nearly two months after Snowden"s earliest disclosures, NSA Director
Keith Alexander declined to say whether he had a good idea of what Snowden had
downloaded or how many NSA files Snowden had taken with him, noting an ongoing
criminal investigation.

The disclosure undermines the Obama administration"s assurances to Congress and
the public that the NSA surveillance programs can"t be abused because its spying
systems are so aggressively monitored and audited for oversight purposes: If
Snowden could defeat the NSA"s own tripwires and internal burglar alarms, how
many other employees or contractors could do the same?

NSA spokeswoman Vanee Vines told the AP that Alexander "had a sense of what
documents and information had been taken," but "he did not say the comprehensive
investigation had been completed." Vines would not say whether Snowden had found
a way to view and download the documents he took, without the NSA knowing.

In defending the NSA surveillance programs that Snowden revealed, Deputy
Attorney General James Cole told Congress last month that the administration
effectively monitors the activities of employees using them.

"This program goes under careful audit," Cole said. "Everything that is done
under it is documented and reviewed before the decision is made and reviewed
again after these decisions are made to make sure that nobody has done the
things that you"re concerned about happening."

The disclosure of Snowden"s hacking prowess inside the NSA also could
dramatically increase the perceived value of his knowledge to foreign
governments, which would presumably be eager to learn any counter-detection
techniques that could be exploited against U.S. government networks.

It also helps explain the recent seizure in Britain of digital files belonging
to David Miranda the partner of Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald in an effort
to help quantify Snowden"s leak of classified material to the Guardian
newspaper. Authorities there stopped Miranda last weekend as he changed planes
at Heathrow Airport while returning home to Brazil from Germany, where Miranda
had met with Laura Poitras, a U.S. filmmaker who has worked with Greenwald on
the NSA story.

Snowden, a former U.S. intelligence contractor, was employed by Booz Allen
Hamilton in Hawaii before leaking classified documents to the Guardian and
Washington Post newspapers. As a system administrator, Snowden had the ability
to move around data and had access to thumb drives that would have allowed him
to transfer information to computers outside the NSA"s secure system, Alexander
has said.

In his job, Snowden purloined many files, including ones that detailed the U.S.
government"s programs to collect the metadata of phone calls of U.S. citizens
and copy Internet traffic as it enters and leaves the U.S., then routes it to
the NSA for analysis.

Officials have said Snowden had access to many documents but didn"t know
necessarily how the programs functioned. He dipped into compartmentalized files
as systems administrator and took what he wanted. He managed to do so for months
without getting caught. In May, he flew to Hong Kong and eventually made his way
to Russia, where that government has granted him asylum.

NBC News reported Thursday that the NSA was "overwhelmed" in trying to figure
what Snowden had stolen and didn"t know everything he had downloaded.

Insider threats have troubled the administration and Congress, particularly in
the wake of Bradley Manning, a young soldier who decided to leak hundreds of
thousands of sensitive documents in late 2009 and early 2010.

Congress had wanted to address the insider threat problem in the 2010
Intelligence Authorization Act, but the White House asked for the language to be
removed because of concerns about successfully meeting a deadline. In the 2013
version, Congress included language urging the creation of an automated,
insider-threat detection program.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              25 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                            August 13, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden's father gets

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 561 words


visa to visit

son in Russia

Agencies

WASHINGTON

National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden's father has secured documents to
visit his son in Russia and plans to discuss how he could fight espionage.

Neither Lon Snowden nor his attorney Bruce Fein has spoken directly with the
former NSA analyst since he fled the United States and received asylum in
Russia, they said.

But the father and lawyer also said they look forward to meeting Edward Snowden
to consider options for the leaker to return to the United States at some point.

"As a father, I want my son to come home if I believe that the justice system
... is going to be applied correctly," Lon Snowden said.

But the elder Snowden isn't convinced his son would get a fair hearing in court,
given what he called "absolutely irresponsible" descriptions of his son's
actions from President Barack Obama, his administration and top lawmakers from
both parties.

"They have poisoned the well, so to speak, in terms of a potential jury pool,"
said Lon Snowden, of Allentown, Pennsylvania.

Edward Snowden roiled the United States intelligence agencies and upended US
relations around the globe with his disclosures of highly classified programmes
that allow the United States to collect millions of pieces of data, including
Americans' phone records. The government has charged him with violations of the
Espionage Act in federal court in Alexandria, Virginia.

Fein said the family is willing to discuss conditions under which Edward Snowden
might return to the United States and perhaps face criminal proceedings. Fein
added that he plans to "suggest criminal defence attorneys who've got experience
with criminal Espionage Act prosecutions" when he meets with Snowden.

Edward Snowden's whereabouts in Russia remain unknown.

'Political outrage will fade'

Russia's decision to grant Edward Snowden temporary asylum angered the US
government and scuttled Obama's plans for a one-on-one meeting with Russian
President Vladimir Putin in visit Moscow next month.

Lon Snowden said the political outrage in Washington would fade and added "the
American people are absolutely unhappy with what they've learned â[#x20ac]" and
more is going to be forthcoming.

"Where my son chooses to live the rest of his life is going to be his decision.
But I would like at some point in time for him to be able to come back to the
US," Lon Snowden said.

Meanwhile, WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange said Americans owe Edward Snowden a
debt of gratitude because he prompted Obama to promise an overhaul of secret
surveillance.

Australian-born Assange said the US president had "validated Edward Snowden's
role as a whistleblower" by announcing plans which promised greater oversight
and transparency.

"It was a victory of sorts for Edward Snowden and his many supporters," Assange
said in comments published on his Australian website.

"As Snowden has stated, his biggest concern was if he blew the whistle and
change did not occur.

"Well reforms are taking shape, and for that, the president and people of the
United States and around the world owe Edward Snowden a debt of
gratitude."t0.000

"I don't think Mr Snowden was a patriot," Obama said.

But Assange said had it not been for Snowden's disclosures, no one would have
known about the programmes and no reforms could have taken place. He went on to
criticise the Obama administration' handling of whistleblowers.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              26 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             August 12, 2013 Monday

Russians issue a visa to father of Snowden;
He says he'll urge his son to return to United States if a fair trial is assured

BYLINE: BRIAN KNOWLTON

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 678 words

ABSTRACT

He and the family's lawyer got visas to visit Mr. Snowden. He indicated the two
would urge him to return to the United States to face federal charges if
acceptable trial conditions could be negotiated.

FULL TEXT

WASHINGTON

The father of the fugitive U.S. security contractor Edward J. Snowden said
Sunday that he and the family's lawyer had obtained visas to visit Mr. Snowden
in Russia, and he indicated they would urge him to return to the United States
to face federal charges if acceptable trial conditions could be negotiated.

''What I would like,'' said Lon Snowden, the father, ''is for this to be vetted
in open court, for the American people to have all the facts.'' He said he
favored his son's returning if a fair trial was assured.

As for a possible plea deal, he said, ''I'm not open to it, and that's what I'll
share with my son.''

Appearing on the ABC News program ''This Week,'' the elder Mr. Snowden and the
family's lawyer, Bruce Fein, declined to say when they would visit, to avoid
what Mr. Fein called a media ''frenzy,'' but they said it would be soon.

In a criminal complaint filed in June, federal prosecutors charged Edward J.
Snowden with theft, unauthorized communication of national defense information
and willfully disclosing classified communications intelligence ''to an
unauthorized person.'' The second and third charge were brought under the
Espionage Act of 1917.

''We intend to visit with Edward and suggest criminal defense attorneys who've
got experience in Espionage Act prosecutions,'' said Mr. Fein, a well-known
Washington lawyer who specializes in constitutional and international law. Such
lawyers, he added, are uncommon, since prosecutions under the Espionage Act have
been rare historically.

Mr. Fein said he had laid out his concerns about a potential trial - including
its venue - in a letter to Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., but he insisted
that the terms he mentioned were not ''ultimatums'' but rather discussion
points.

Mr. Fein and Lon Snowden offered few details about the younger Snowden's living
arrangement in Russia. The authorities there granted him asylum on the condition
that he disclose no more information about the National Security Agency
programs.

Mr. Fein did say that he had been told by Mr. Snowden's lawyer in Russia that he
was safe but ''exhausted'' after an extraordinary odyssey that took him from
Hawaii, where he worked as an intelligence contractor with access to a huge
array of government information, to Hong Kong, where he released details of
N.S.A. programs, and then on to Russia in late June.

Lon Snowden, a Pennsylvania resident who served in the United States Coast Guard
for about 30 years before retiring in 2009, has said in previous interviews that
he would take precautions while in Russia to do nothing that could be construed
as aiding or abetting a fugitive. For that reason, he said recently, he had not
spoken to his son since before he flew to Hong Kong.

President Barack Obama last week canceled a planned meeting with President
Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in Moscow, in part to express American pique over
Russia's decision to grant asylum to Mr. Snowden.

Mr. Obama said Friday that if Mr. Snowden believed in the rightness of his
actions, ''then, like every American citizen, he can come here, appear before
the court with a lawyer and make his case.''

At the same time, the president promised more openness and scrutiny of the
N.S.A.'s programs, in a clear response to widespread criticism following Mr.
Snowden's revelations.

Representative Peter T. King of New York, a member of the House intelligence
committee, said Sunday on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation'' that he would
have liked to have seen Mr. Obama denounce Mr. Snowden more forcefully. ''He's
not a patriot,'' Mr. King said.

Lon Snowden, in his interview, listed Mr. King among congressional leaders he
said had leapt to ''absolutely irresponsible'' conclusions about his son before
any trial has been held. ''They have poisoned the well, so to speak, in terms of
a potential jury pool,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              27 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     August 12, 2013 Monday 11:31 PM GMT+4

US to focus on Edward Snowden, not his father travelling to Russia - official

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON August 12


- The U.S. authorities have their attention focused on National Security Agency
leaker Edward Snowden not his father Lon who is planning to go to Russia, U.S.
Department of State Deputy Spokesperson Marie Harf said on Monday, August 12.

She confirmed that the Obama administration continued to insist on Edward
Snowden's return to the United States for trial and assured the audience that it
would be a fair trial.

Harf said earlier this month that the Russian authorities' decision to grant
temporary asylum to Snowden was "an extremely disappointing step."

She said the U.S. authorities "continue to press with the Russian Government
that Mr. Snowden needs to be returned to the United States where he will face a
free and fair trial."

Harf stressed that "this move by the Russian Government undermines a
longstanding record of law enforcement cooperation, particularly since the
Boston Marathon bombings. So we will continue to make that point with the
Russian Government at all points in this process."

She said "Mr. Snowden is wanted on very serious charges and that he needs to be
returned to the United States to face those charges."

The U.S. administration regretted Russia's "disappointing decision" to grant
Snowden temporary asylum and said it was also "a factor that we considered in
assessing the current state of our bilateral relationship."

U.S. Deputy National Security Affairs Ben Rhodes said the decision to give
temporary asylum to Snowden had further complicated the already complex
relations between the two countries.

Edward Snowden arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport from Hong Kong on June 23 and was
staying in its transition zone until the beginning of August. He applied for
temporary asylum in Russia.

Earlier he had passed to the press information about mass electronic
surveillance by the U.S. authorities under the PRISM programme and claimed that
American security services watched and recorded people's actions and
conversations even if they did nothing wrong.

He said security services were gathering information primarily about the users
of popular search servers and social networks.

On August 1, Snowden was granted temporary asylum in Russia for one year. He
left the airport together with WikiLeaks staffer and legal advisor Sarah
Harrison who has accompanied him during his 39 day stay in the transit zone and
continues to do so. She has remained with Mr Snowden at all times to protect his
safety and security, including during his exit from Hong Kong. "They departed
from the airport together in a taxi and are headed to a secure, confidential
place," WikiLeaks said in a statement.

"Despite the ongoing pressure from the United States, which has been trying to
interfere with this sovereign process in violation of the U.N. Protocol on the
Rights of Refugees, Russia has done the right thing and granted Mr Snowden
temporary asylum. The certificate of temporary asylum by the Russian Federation
lasts for one year and affords Mr Snowden the right to live in and travel around
Russia, where he can now plan his next steps in safety," WikiLeaks said in a
statement.

On receiving his asylum certificate Snowden said, as quoted by WikiLeaks: "Over
the past eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no respect for
international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning. I thank the
Russian Federation for granting me asylum in accordance with its laws and
international obligations."

WikiLeaks commended Russia for accepting Snowden's request and supporting him
when many countries felt so compromised by U.S. threats that they could not.

Over twenty asylum requests to various countries were made to try to secure Mr
Snowden's passage. Throughout this period the United States took irregular and
disproportionate actions to block Snowden's right to seek asylum in violation of
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2312 (1967), which states that "the
grant of asylum. . . is a peaceful and humanitarian act and... as such, it
cannot be regarded as unfriendly by any other State."

WikiLeaks said the United States is no longer a safe place for whistleblowers
and national security journalists and urged that the U.S. government amends its
ways, reverse this trend and re-establish its moral authority.

"President Barack Obama while elected on a platform promising to protect
whistleblowers, has now prosecuted more national security whistleblowers than
all other presidents in United States history combined. This bellicose response
from the US administration makes it clear that Snowden could not receive a fair
trial.

In the wake's of Russia's decision, Obama cancelled his trip to Moscow for talks
with President Vladimir Putin but said he would attend the G20 summit in St.
Petersburg in September. The White House said that "there is not enough recent
progress" in American-Russian relations to hold a bilateral summit in early
September.

"We have reached the conclusion that there is not enough recent progress in our
bilateral agenda with Russia to hold a U.S.-Russia Summit in early September,"
the White House statement said.

The U.S. values "the achievements made with Russia in the President's first
term," including the New START Treaty, and cooperation on Afghanistan, Iran, and
North Korea. However, "given our lack of progress on issues such as missile
defence and arms control, trade and commercial relations, global security
issues, and human rights and civil society in the last twelve months, we have
informed the Russian Government that we believe it would be more constructive to
postpone the summit until we have more results from our shared agenda," the
White House said.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              28 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             August 12, 2013 Monday

Snowden"s father gets visa to visit son in Russia

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 462 words


WASHINGTON (AP) National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden"s father has
secured documents to visit his son in Russia and plans to discuss how he could
fight espionage charges, Lon Snowden and his attorney said Sunday.

Neither Lon Snowden nor his attorney Bruce Fein has spoken directly with the
former NSA analyst since he fled the United States and received asylum in
Russia, they said. But the father and lawyer also said they look forward to
meeting with Edward Snowden to consider options for the leaker to return to the
United States at some point.

"As a father, I want my son to come home if I believe that the justice system
... is going to be applied correctly," Lon Snowden said.

But the elder Snowden isn"t convinced his son would get a fair hearing in court,
given what he called "absolutely irresponsible" descriptions of his son"s
actions from President Barack Obama, his administration and top lawmakers from
both parties.

"They have poisoned the well, so to speak, in terms of a potential jury pool,"
said Lon Snowden, of Allentown, Pennsylvania.

Edward Snowden roiled the United States intelligence agencies and upended U.S.
relations around the globe with his disclosures of highly classified programs
that allow the United States to collect millions of pieces of data, including
Americans" phone records. The government has charged him with violations of the
Espionage Act in federal court in Alexandria, Virginia.

Fein said the family is willing to discuss conditions under which Edward Snowden
might return to the United States and perhaps face criminal proceedings. Fein
added that he plans to "suggest criminal defense attorneys who"ve got experience
with criminal Espionage Act prosecutions" when he meets with Snowden.

Edward Snowden"s whereabouts in Russia remain unknown. The timing of the visit
from Lon Snowden and Fein was uncertain; both declined to elaborate.

Last week, Edward Snowden"s Russian lawyer said he had sent Lon Snowden the
required invitation to visit the country, a step toward securing a travel visa.
Anatoly Kucherena said he hoped a visit would happen in the coming days.

Fein said the trip would happen "very soon."

Russia"s decision to grant Edward Snowden temporary asylum angered the U.S.
government and scuttled Obama"s plans for a one-on-one meeting with Russian
President Vladimir Putin in visit Moscow next month.

Lon Snowden said the political outrage in Washington would fade and added "the
American people are absolutely unhappy with what they"ve learned and more is
going to be forthcoming."

"Where my son chooses to live the rest of his life is going to be his decision.
But I would like at some point in time for him to be able to come back to the
U.S.," Lon Snowden said.

Lon Snowden and Fein spoke on ABC"s "This Week."

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              29 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       August 12, 2013 Monday 8:49 AM GMT

Edward Snowden's father has 'date for visiting Moscow';
National Security Agency (NSA) analyst Edward Snowden's father has secured
documents to visit his son in Russia and plans to discuss how he could fight
espionage charges.

LENGTH: 311 words


Speaking on ABC's This Week programme, Lon Snowden's lawyer, Bruce Fein, said he
and Mr Snowden have secured visas and a date to visit the former NSA analyst.

"We now have a date for visiting Moscow, " Mr Fein said, adding that they will
not disclose the date because it could incite "a frenzy." Mr Fein said only that
it would be "very soon."

Neither Lon Snowden nor Mr Fein has spoken directly with Edward Snowden since he
fled the US and received asylum in Russia .

But the father and lawyer said they look forward to meeting with him to consider
options for the former NSA employee to return to the US at some point.

"As a father, I want my son to come home if I believe the justice system that we
should be afforded as Americans is going to be applied correctly," Lon Snowden
said.

But the elder Snowden is not convinced his son would get a fair hearing in
court, given what he called "absolutely irresponsible" descriptions of his son's
actions from President Barack Obama, his administration and top lawmakers from
both parties.

"They have poisoned the well, so to speak, in terms of a potential jury pool,"
said Lon Snowden.

Mr Fein said the family is willing to discuss conditions under which Edward
Snowden might return to the US and perhaps face criminal proceedings.

He said he plans to "suggest criminal defence attorneys who've got experience
with criminal Espionage Act prosecutions" when he meets with Snowden.

Russia's decision to grant Edward Snowden temporary asylum angered the US
government and scuttled Mr Obama's plans for a one-on-one meeting with Russian
President Vladimir Putin in visit Moscow next month .

Lon Snowden said the political outrage in Washington would fade and added "the
American people are absolutely unhappy with what they've learned, and more is
going to be forthcoming."

Source: APTN

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              30 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       August 12, 2013 Monday 3:04 AM GMT

Edward Snowden's father granted Russian visa to visit his son;
The father of Edward Snowden, the fugitive former U.S. spy agency contractor,
has received a Russian visa and will travel there shortly to see his son, he and
his lawyer said on Sunday.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 511 words


Attorney Bruce Fein said in a television appearance that he and Lon Snowden were
sceptical about President Barack Obama's pledge to limit government surveillance
programs, and they remain doubtful that young Snowden can receive a fair trial
in the United States.

"We have visas. We have a date, which we won't disclose right now because of the
frenzy" over the affair, Fein told the ABC News program "This Week," on which
they both appeared. They will travel to Russia "very soon," he said.

"We intend to visit with Edward and suggest criminal defence attorneys who have
got experience in Espionage Act prosecutions," Fein said.

Lon Snowden told a reporter outside his home in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
that he "absolutely" had received his visa, but had not yet set a date for the
trip to Russia to see his son.

The younger Snowden was stuck at a Moscow airport for more than five weeks
before Russia granted him a year's asylum on Aug. 1.

Lon Snowden told Reuters in an interview on Wednesday that he has not spoken to
his son since the former National Security Agency contractor left the United
States for Hong Kong, just before news broke in June of the disclosures he made
about the U.S. surveillance programs.

On Sunday, the elder Snowden criticised the Obama administration's handling of
his son's case and dismissed the president's vow on Friday to improve oversight
of surveillance, transparency and other efforts to restore public trust in the
government's programs.

"I believe much of what he suggested is superficial," Lon Snowden said on ABC.

Snowden's father added that he is "not open" to a plea deal that would allow his
30-year-old son to return to the United States.

"The only deal will be true justice," he said, repeating his concern that his
son won't be treated well because his right to a fair trial has been compromised
by public criticism by U.S. officials.

"When you consider many of the statements made by our leaders, leaders in
Congress, they are absolutely irresponsible and inconsistent with our system of
justice," said Snowden.

"They have poisoned the well, so to speak, in terms of a potential jury pool,"
he said.

Washington's inability to persuade Russia to return Snowden to the United States
has curdled U.S. relations with Russia. Obama cancelled a planned summit in
Moscow with President Vladimir Putin, although the two countries held high-level
political and defence talks in Washington on Friday.

A senior U.S. lawmaker from Obama's Democratic Party told the ABC program that
it seemed Washington was more interested than Putin in forging a productive
relationship.

"It seems to me that as we've tried to restart this relationship several times,
that maybe now is a moment to pause and think about how we're going to move
forward with Russia," Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Robert
Menendez told ABC.

Putin's government is "unresponsive" to U.S. concerns about issues such as the
civil war in Syria, nuclear disarmament and draconian Russian legislation
against gays and lesbians, said Menendez.

Edited by Steve Wilson

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              31 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     August 11, 2013 Sunday 08:10 PM GMT+4

Snowden's father says he has Russian entry visa (adds)

LENGTH: 442 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK August 11


- The father of the former NSA contractor, Edward Snowden, who leaked details of
the government's massive Internet- and phone-tracking programs, said on Sunday
he had received a Russian visa.

Appearing on the ABC television channel, Lon Snowden and his attorney Bruce Fein
said they had received Russian visas but they did not say when they was planning
to fly to Russia. Fein said it would happen "very soon."

Lon Snowden and his attorney Bruce Fein said that neither of them had spoken
directly with the former NSA analyst since he fled the United States and
received asylum in Russia. But they said they looked forward to meeting with
Edward Snowden to consider options for him to return to the United States at
some point. Fein said the family was willing to discuss conditions under which
Edward Snowden might return to the United States and perhaps face criminal
proceedings. Fein added that he planned to "suggest criminal defense attorneys
who've got experience with criminal Espionage Act prosecutions" when he met with
Snowden.

"Where my son chooses to live the rest of his life is going to be his decision,"
Lon Snowden said. "But I would like at some point in time for him to be able to
come back to the U.S."

"As a father, I want my son to come home if I believe that the justice system
... is going to be applied correctly," Lon Snowden said. But the elder Snowden
said he was not convinced his son would get a fair hearing in court, given what
he called "absolutely irresponsible" descriptions of his son's actions from
President Barack Obama, his administration and top lawmakers from both parties.
"They have poisoned the well, so to speak, in terms of a potential jury pool,"
he noted.

Earlier this week, U.S. President Barack Obama said Edward Snowden was not a
patriot for revealing widespread government surveillance programs. He said the
man should appear in court to defend his views.

Edward Snowden, 30, was accused in the U.S. of leaking information on the
National Security Agency's programs of electronic eavesdropping. He received
temporary asylum in Russia after spending more than a month in the transit zone
of Sheremetyevo airport.

U.S. authorities claim that Snowden encroached on two clauses of the 1917 law on
espionage by making public without authorization some secret data pertaining to
national defense and by purportedly transferring U.S. intelligence data the
individuals who had no powers for possession of such data.

In addition, Snowden Jr. is charged with stealing the property of U.S.
government. He is facing a grim prospect of ten years in jail on each of the
three charges if he turns up on American soil one day.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              32 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                            August 10, 2013 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Obama takes Snowden to task for disclosing secrets; Vows to open NSA program to
scrutiny

BYLINE: WILLIAM MARSDEN, Postmedia News, Washington Bureau

SECTION: NEWS; William Marsden; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


U.S. President Barack Obama has pledged to strengthen privacy and civil liberty
protections within the National Security Agency's domestic surveillance programs
and to open the system to greater public scrutiny.

During an hour-long news conference held Friday just before he left for his
summer holiday on Martha's Vineyard, he said that a system of traditional checks
and balances imposed by Congress "would be enough to give people assurance that
these programs are run properly."

"Let's put the whole elephant out there so that people know exactly what they
are looking at," he said. "Let's examine what is working, what's not. Are there
additional protections that can be put in place? And let's move forward."

Obama's statements came in reaction to the ongoing debate over disclosures made
by NSA contractor Edward Snowden, 30, about the global extent of U.S. domestic
and foreign surveillance. Snowden leaked to The Guardian newspaper in June a
judgment by the secret Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court that revealed the
NSA was systematically obtaining the phone records of millions of Americans.

Subsequent disclosures revealed that the NSA was warehousing almost all phone
records of Americans - and also of many foreigners - in possible violation of
the Fourth Amendment and the Patriot Act.

The records include the time and place of phone calls, as well as the numbers
called. They do not include the content of the phone calls.

The revelations have sparked congressional hearings and legislation designed to
rein in the NSA.

Snowden's revelations also forced intelligence director James Clapper to admit
he had misled Congress about the extent of the domestic surveillance.

Much of it was embarrassing for Obama, who in 2007 had criticized the Patriot
Act as a violation of the constitution because of its warrantless seizure
provisions. Yet as president he has allowed it to continue, and vigorously
pursued leakers and investigated journalists and their sources.

Most of Obama's news conference was devoted to questions about Snowden and
domestic surveillance. He appeared uncomfortable and occasionally impatient as
he tried to defend his record on civil liberties and privacy protection. At one
point, he protested that Snowden should not garner credit for bringing these
issues to public attention and for initiating a nationwide debate.

Many in the U.S. believe Snowden is a hero. But not Obama. "I don't think Mr.
Snowden was a patriot," he said. He added that Snowden should return from
Russia, where he has been granted a one-year asylum, and face justice. Snowden
is facing three felony charges for leaking national secrets.

"If, in fact, he believes that what he did was right, then like every American
citizen he can come here before the court with a lawyer and make his case," he
said.

Obama's manhunt for Snowden has so far caused him to cancel a summit with
Russian President Vladimir Putin. It has strained relations with many South
American countries after the U.S. essentially forced the Bolivian president's
plane to land in Vienna because it suspected Snowden was on board.

Obama claimed Snowden should have taken his concerns to authorities within the
intelligence community where, he said, he would have had full whistleblower
protection. He did not mention that this action would have remained secret and
the public likely would never have heard about his complaints.

Obama then claimed that it was always his intention to strengthen oversight of
the NSA's domestic surveillance.

He said he called for a "thorough review of our surveillance operations before
Mr. Snowden made these leaks."

He conceded, however, that "there is no doubt that Mr. Snowden's leaks triggered
a much more rapid and passionate response than would have been the case if I
simply appointed this review board to go through it and I had sat down with
Congress to work this thing through."

"It wouldn't have been as exciting and wouldn't have generated the same press,
but I actually think we would have gotten to the same place," Obama added.

Despite his concession, he claimed that Snowden's disclosures had put at risk
U.S. national security "and some very vital ways that we were able to get
intelligence." He did not elaborate.

He also maintained that the NSA does not conduct surveillance "on U.S. persons"
without a warrant.

"I'm comfortable that the program currently is not being abused," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: WIN MCNAMEE, GETTY IMAGES; President Barack Obama said Friday that
Edward Snowden, who faces charges in the U.S. and is living in Russia, "can come
here before the court with a lawyer and make his case.";

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              33 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            August 8, 2013 Thursday

Russian senator opens bank account to raise money for Snowden

LENGTH: 853 words


Text of report by the website of pro-government Russian newspaper Izvestiya on 7
August

Report by Svetlana Subbotina and Sergey Zvezda: "United Russia [One Russia]
Senator Opens Bank Account for Snowden. Ruslan Gattarov Said That Former CIA
Staffer Needs Money."

United Russia's Ruslan Gattarov, head of the Federation Council working group
for the protection of personal data, has stepped forward to help former CIA
staffer Edward Snowden, who has received temporary asylum in Russia. He said
that a bank account to which anybody who so wishes would be able to transfer
money will be opened within the next few days to collect money for the fugitive
American citizen.

"I started receiving queries from many of our citizens and bloggers about how
money could be transferred to Snowden so that, at the end of the day, he has
something to live on, can rent an apartment, and can buy clothes. I am ready to
help to open a bank account and announce the start of the collection of funds,"
Gattarov says. "The question of who will take on the mission of monitoring the
finances is currently being decided. I am confident that it will be a person
with an impeccable reputation -- a representative of civil society."

Gattarov also stressed that when the possibility of opening a bank account to
support Snowden was being discussed with the former CIA staffer's
representatives it became clear that he needs money and that help would be very
handy.

Apart from the bank account, a website in support of Snowden -- helpsnowden.ru
-- is currently being created. At this address anybody who so wishes can find
out how to help the former US Intelligence Agency staffer.

"The helpsnowden.ru domain name has already been registered, and experts from
several IT companies who have offered to create such a website for absolutely no
charge have already started developing it," Gattarov assures us.

The developers reckon that not only Russians but also residents of other
countries will help Snowden. It is for them that it has been decided to develop
the site in two domain zones -- .ru and .net.

Anatoliy Kucherena, member of the Public Chamber and a lawyer who has provided
legal support for Snowden, told Izvestiya that "Edward will gratefully accept
help from Russians and residents of other countries."

"Edward is not a wealthy person and he will be short of funds of his own for a
long time. I want to say thank you to those bloggers who are not indifferent to
his fate. I will also help him as much as I can, of course" Kucherena says.

The blogger Anton Korobkov-Zemlyanskiy, another member of the Public Chamber, is
prepared to donate money for Snowden and says that as soon as the payment
systems are in place he will transfer 30,000 rubles to Snowden.

"On the social networking sites, where I have a large number of subscribers and
readers, I will post both the name of the website and appeals for support for
Edward Snowden. We are not talking about collecting millions of rubles; we are
not helping a severely sick person, and not very large sums will suffice so he
can buy some new clothes, acomputer, and books," the blogger says.

Korobkov-Zemlyanskiy does not doubt that Snowden will not make use of assistance
for long -- he will soon be able to find a job.

"I know that Pavel Durov [founder of the social networking site VK] has already
offered Edward Snowden a job, and most likely several other IT companies will
invite him to cooperate with them," he says.

The holders of the bank account may actually collect significant sums for
Snowden, Mitya Aleshkovskiy, director of the Help Needed [Nuzhna Pomoshch]
charitable project, suggests.

"Russians see the Snowden situation as a manifestation of our state's strength;
we have thumbed our nose at the Americans, they say. And proceeding from a sense
of contrariness and an attempt to prove to ourselves that this confirms our
status as a great power, it could become popular. Although the subject has
nothing in common with reality, and it is not necessary to create such a
website," Aleshkovskiy said.

For his part, Gleb Pavlovskiy, president of the Effective Policy Foundation, is
confident that the pro-regime business community will provide assistance for
Snowden.

"I think that people like Snowden live at expense of the nonbudget funds of the
state in which they find themselves. Private assistance is not very likely; most
likely financial injections will be provided by business structures affiliated
with state interests," Pavlovskiy says.

The expert noted that both Snowden and the businesses that decide to help him
may face difficulties.

"Cooperation with Russian state institutions may aggravate his guilt in the eyes
of the American judicial system. And businesses that openly help Snowden may
encounter difficulties both on Western markets and with the authorities in the
West," he noted.

Edward Snowden received temporary asylum in Russia on 1 August and has already
registered at his place of residence. Prior to this, from 23 June he had been in
the Sheremetyevo Airport transit zone, which he was not entitled to leave.

Source: Izvestiya website, Moscow, in Russian 7 Aug 13

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              34 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     August 6, 2013 Tuesday 08:43 PM GMT+4

Snowden's father plans to visit Russia this month

LENGTH: 287 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON August 6


- Lon Snowden, the father of former CIA employee Edward Snowden, has accepted
the invitation to visit Russia and will make the trip this month,"
representative of Lon Snowden's lawyer Mattie Fein told Itar-Tass.

Russian lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, a member of the Russian Public Chamber, told
journalists earlier on Tuesday that he had sent the invitation to Edward
Snowden's father, his friends and a lawyer to visit Russia.

Earlier, Lon Snowden said that he intended to visit Russia to see his son. He
said that he was proud of his son and he would certainly go to Russia. He added
that he would do that legitimately and in appropriate circumstances.

In his last week interview with the Washington Post, Lon Snowden said how the
FBI had fruitlessly tried to arrange his trip to Moscow so that he could
persuade his son to return home. Lon Snowden also said that he did not want to
be an instrument of emotional impact on his son in the hands of the U.S.
security services.

Edward Snowden who leaked information on the U.S. global surveillance programs
in the media received temporary asylum in Russia last Thursday. Prior to that,
he had spent more than a month at Sheremetyevo airport's transit zone.

The United States is accusing Snowden of disclosing secret information on the
U.S. National Security Agency's electronic surveillance programs. Snowden is
charged with two violations of the 1917 U.S Espionage Act: unsanctioned
disclosure of secrets linked to national defense and intentional hand-over of
U.S. surveillance data to persons who were not entitled to receive that kind of
information. Besides, Snowden is also charged with stealing the U.S. government
property. He is facing up to 10 years in prison on each count.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              35 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 6, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Leaker's guide to tourism

BYLINE: Isabel Gorst

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - It's anyone's guess where Edward Snowden was going when he gave
reporters the slip and sped away from Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport in a taxi
last week.

After 39 days marooned in the no-man's land of the airport transit lounge, the
fugitive former National Security Agency contractor has won temporary asylum in
Russia.

Anatoly Kucherena, the Russian senator acting as a lawyer for Snowden, says his
client has been ground down by the airport ordeal and could use some rest and
relaxation.

"He needs a period of rehabilitation, or adaptation, because he is very tired
and morally exhausted," he said.

But how should Snowden spend his time now that he's been sprung from the
airport? Below is a personalized guide to the land where he is now stuck - from
a liberty seeker's must-see tourist sites to where he might indulge his penchant
for anime.

Getting started

Reviled by many in the United States as a traitor, Snowden can count on at least
arm's-length support from ordinary people in Russia. More than half of the
respondents to a survey by Levada, an independent Moscow-based pollster, favored
the Kremlin's decision to grant Snowden asylum and only 10 percent were against.

If Snowden really is, as his father suggests, a sensitive sort, he'll want to
probe the Russian soul. That means getting deep into Russian language and
culture.

Learning basic Russian should not be an insurmountable problem for Snowden, who
mastered Japanese during a stint working for the NSA in Japan. Making sense of
the obscure and often irreverent doublespeak of Russian online chat rooms will
be another matter. But Snowden, so wary of snoopers that he used to don a red
hood before inserting his computer password, understands living in code.

Having fun

Snowden says he forsook a life in "paradise" in the United States, but Moscow is
not without delights to tickle his fancy.

If he still hankers after Japanese food, Moscow is a good place to be. A sushi
fad that began in the 1990s has turned into an inescapable addiction. More than
1,000 Japanese eateries are listed in the city, including the ubiquitous budget
Yakitoria chains and the upmarket Nobu, where there is even a New York chef.

Russians excel at having a good time, and Snowden, at least while he is in the
post-transit-lounge rehabilitation phase, might as well let his hair down.

Tweeters have joked that the first place Snowden should go is the Hungry Duck,
Moscow's legendary strip club, a favorite haunt of expats in the 1990s.
Unfortunately, the Duck is no longer open, but the city has an abundance of more
upscale options. Almost all feature pole dancing - presumably an attraction for
Snowden, whose girlfriend was an instructor in exotic dance and fitness when the
couple met in Maryland.

Who's paying?

Snowden reportedly burned through a lot of his savings ordering from the
overpriced cafes at the Moscow airport, so he will have to find a way to make a
living.

Kucherena, who told the New York Times he was acting for Snowden pro bono, said
that won't be a problem - there's a possibility of his client, known for his
exhibitionist tendencies, appearing on Russian TV talk shows.

As a computer whiz, Snowden should be able to find gainful employment in Russia,
which is still a hotbed of gifted, and even entrepreneurial, geeks despite the
departure of some of the best brains for Silicon Valley.

Within hours of Snowden's  leaving the airport, Pavel Durov, the millionaire
co-founder of VKontakte, Russia's most popular social networking site, announced
that the U.S. fugitive could find a place in the "star team" at VK's St.
Petersburg headquarters.

There's a risk that Durov's offer could be a ploy designed to curry favor with
the authorities. VK, often used by the Russian opposition to rally supporters,
has been under official pressure of late as part of a broader crackdown on
activism.

Snowden might be better off sending his rÃ©sumÃ© to Kaspersky, the Russian
computer security firm that competes globally with the likes of McAfee and
Symantec to develop weapons against cybercrime.

If he is looking for a fresh start professionally, Snowden might indulge his
interest in anime with a job at one of Russia's animation studios that are
trying to revive the glory of the Soviet era. A 1960s cartoon featuring the
jug-eared creature Cheburashka became the inspiration for Pokemon in Japan as
well as a symbol for the liberal intelligentsia in Russia.

Tourist sights

Snowden is probably allergic to airports by now, so if he wants to explore a
country as vast as Russia, he'll want to start with somewhere nearby.
Fortunately, St. Petersburg, one of the world's most enchantingly beautiful and
cultured cities, is less than four hours from Moscow on the new high-speed
Sapsan train.

Russia has never gone in for freedom in a big way, and St. Petersburg, the
former seat of the imperial czars and epicenter of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution
that overthrew them, is redolent with the history of libertarians who paid a
high price for their convictions.

Snowden might like to visit the Peter and Paul Fortress and see for himself
where the Decembrists, a group of liberal-leaning military officers who plotted
to overthrow the czar, were incarcerated in 1825.

Snowden has described himself as a Buddhist, so a pilgrimage to Kalmykia - a
barren steppe land bordering the Caspian Sea and the only region in Europe where
Buddhism is the dominant religion - would be an obvious choice if he wants to
venture into the Russian wilds. Kalmykians have been begging the Kremlin to risk
China's ire and let the Dalai Lama visit, so Snowden for once would be seen as a
second-tier fugitive.

Love life

According to his lawyer, Snowden has said that he misses his girlfriend, so he
might steer clear of romantic adventures for now. Still, there may be
temptation.

Anna Chapman, the celebrity Russian TV hostess who was expelled from the United
States for espionage in 2010, appeared to express interest.

"Will you marry me?" Chapman tweeted on July 3, as a despondent Snowden mulled
over his prospects on the eve of Independence Day.

style@washpost.com

Gorst is a freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              36 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             August 5, 2013 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Snowden poses greater threat to America in Russia

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 351 words


National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden finally was granted temporary
asylum in Russia last week.

I do not think the U.S. relationship with Russia should be strained because of
Edward Snowden. Snowden did Americans a favor by exposing this spying on its own
citizens. But the other information Snowden gave out, about the U.S. spying on
other countries, amounts to treason and was the action of a crying brat giving
his country a black eye.

Now I would change my mind about this, and the relations with Russia, if Snowden
had more secrets he could give out about our country's national security. If
that is the case, then something would have to be done to end that threat.

Bruce Mort

Snowden is a hero. He sacrificed everything for people led by a failed,
out-of-control government. You should be ashamed of yourselves. He did not
release anything that put anybody in danger. He showed just how corrupt the war
on terror is and how it has been used as an excuse for the government.

Joe Daly

Once Snowden's fame disappears and public interest fades, he will be of no use
to the Russians.

In one year's time, they likely will have drained all the information out of him
and then they will toss him aside. If Snowden thinks he will have a "safe"
existence, he is seriously mistaken.

Valerie Boyd

Good for Russia and good for Vladimir Putin! Snowden did the right thing by
blowing the whistle on our spy program. He should not have to spend the rest of
his life in prison for doing the right thing.

We have lost all transparency with our government. Without people such as
Snowden doing the right thing, we're going to completely lose our right to
privacy in this country.

Teyvon Washington

Snowden, like Bradley Manning, is an attention-seeking traitor. Russia has been
and always will be an enemy of the United States.

Amber Cruz Arellano

Snowden did what he believed was right, and his life will be tough because of
it.  He saw something and said something. You may not agree with him, but he's
definitely a man of conviction.

I can't say that I would give up everything I have to stand alongside him.

Corey McDonald

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              37 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             August 4, 2013 Sunday

US-Russia ties survive spat over asylum Snowden's action should not make
relations worse

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 434 words


Bloomberg Analysis, AP

Moscow

If the US wants to cool its relations with Russia, there are better reasons to
do so than President Vladimir Putin's decision to grant asylum to Edward Snowden
.

Legislators from both sides of the political divide have been pressuring US
President Barack Obama to somehow punish Putin for harbouring a man wanted in
the US for publicly disclosing information about the National Security Agency's
electronic surveillance operations.

The White House has suggested that Obama might cancel a summit with Putin
scheduled for next month.

It's hard to imagine what such retribution might achieve. Whatever damage
Snowden could do to US interests is already done.

If he had any further sensitive information to divulge, it's reasonable to
assume that Russia already has it or soon will. Disseminating that information
publicly would only destroy its value, so Russia has no motivation to do so, or
to let Snowden do so.

If the US government's aim, beyond bringing Snowden to trial, is to punish him,
it's already succeeding. Snowden is restricted to living and travelling in parts
of the world that don't have extradition treaties with the US.

He may become something of a celebrity in Russia, but eking out an existence
there under the watchful gaze of the counterintelligence service will be no
picnic.

Snowden has determined where he will live in Russia, but is still figuring out
what he will do during his stay, his Russian lawyer said on Friday. Russia
granted temporary asylum to Snowden on Thursday, allowing him to leave the
Moscow airport where he had been holed up for almost six weeks. Snowden can now
remain in Russia for at least a year as he evades charges of espionage in the
United States.

Snowden "is in a safe place," but the location will remain secret out of
concerns for his security, his lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, said.

Kucherena said Snowden, an NSA systems analyst who revealed himself as the
source of reports in The Guardian newspaper of a vast surveillance programme by
the National Security Agency, needs time after his ordeal at the airport to
figure out what to do next.

"As soon as he decides what he will do, I hope he will announce it himself," the
ITAR-Tass news agency quoted the lawyer as saying. Kucherena said he expects
Snowden to speak to journalists in the near future. Snowden's temporary asylum
allows him to work in Russia, with some restrictions, said immigration lawyer
Bakhrom Ismailov.

Snowden has the same rights for employment as a Russian citizen except that he
is not allowed to work as a public servant or take a job in law enforcement
agencies.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              38 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            August 3, 2013 Saturday

Snowden adds to frailer ties;
New strain prompts U.S. to gauge whether it can still work with Russians

BYLINE: STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

The dispute over Edward J. Snowden is less a singular sore point between the
United States and Russia than a symptom of a relationship that has soured across
the board.

FULL TEXT

Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive intelligence analyst, settled into a secluded,
uncertain self-exile here on Friday amid signs that the United States and Russia
might try to contain the diplomatic fallout over Russia's decision to grant him
temporary asylum.

The U.S. ambassador here, Michael A. McFaul, met on Friday with one of President
Vladimir V. Putin's senior aides to discuss the ''new status'' of Mr. Snowden,
but also a range of other international issues, including cuts in nuclear
stockpiles, missile defense and the conflict in Syria. The U.S. Embassy
announced the ambassador's meeting with the aide, Yuri V. Ushakov, in a posting
on its Twitter account in Russian, but embassy officials declined to elaborate
on the discussions.

Mr. Ushakov previously said that Mr. Snowden's case was not important enough to
derail Russia's overall relationship with the United States, and the inclusion
of other topics suggested that the administration was trying to gauge whether
cooperation was still possible in advance of planned meetings between Mr. Obama
and Mr. Putin in September.

On Thursday, after Mr. Snowden walked out of an airport transit zone where he
had remained for five weeks after arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23,
the White House protested and questioned the utility of the planned meeting
between the two leaders in Moscow. The White House stopped short of announcing
that Mr. Obama would cancel it.

The dispute over Mr. Snowden is less a singular sore point between Washington
and Moscow than a symptom of a relationship that has soured across the board.
Even without it, U.S. officials and analysts said, it was not clear what Mr.
Obama and Mr. Putin would talk about - let alone agree on.

The United States and Russia are far apart on virtually every major issue they
discuss, including those the ambassadors talked about Friday. The White House
began debating last month whether to cancel the September trip.

''Obviously this is not a positive development,'' the White House spokesman, Jay
Carney, said of the asylum grant. ''We are evaluating the utility of a summit.''

The Russian government gave the White House no advance notice of its decision on
Mr. Snowden, Mr. Carney said, making it clear that weeks of public and private
diplomacy had gone nowhere.

A senior Russian lawmaker, Igor N. Morozov, said Friday that he could not rule
out the possibility that Mr. Snowden might in fact leave Russian territory
before the end of the month, resolving at least in part the latest irritant in
relations.

''This temporary decision leaves the Russian side a certain space for
maneuvering, including the possibility to organize the movement of Snowden to
another country,'' Mr. Morozov, the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of
the upper house of Parliament, told the news agency Interfax. ''The Russian side
is interested in Snowden leaving our territory, and this whole story is not a
reason for worsening relations with the United States.''

By Friday evening, the Kremlin had made no official statement about Mr.
Snowden's fate.

Mr. Snowden's whereabouts also remained a mystery. The Russian lawyer who
handled Mr. Snowden's appeal for temporary asylum, Anatoly G. Kucherena, said
that Mr. Snowden had found a place to live but declined to say where, or even to
specify whether it was in Moscow.

He said Mr. Snowden continued to mull over his next steps, understanding that
his situation remained far from settled legally.

''As you know, he is receiving threats from the United States government every
day,'' Mr. Kucherena said. ''The situation is heating up.''

Mr. Snowden had previously indicated that he hoped to receive political asylum
in Latin America, possibly from Bolivia, Ecuador or Venezuela. An official at
the Venezuelan Embassy said officials there had had no contact with Mr. Snowden
since his release. Officials at the Bolivian and Ecuadorean Embassies declined
to comment.

Mr. Kucherena added that Mr. Snowden had agreed informally to the condition that
Mr. Putin set for staying in Russia, though he had made no written statement to
that effect. ''If he wants to stay here,'' Mr. Putin said in July, ''there is
one condition: He must stop his work aimed at inflicting damage on our American
partners, strange as it sounds from my lips.''

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              39 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 3, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy and Putin Aide Discuss Snowden

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS; Nikolay Khalip contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 618 words


MOSCOW -- Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive intelligence analyst, settled into a
secluded, uncertain self-exile here on Friday amid signs that the United States
and Russia might try to contain the diplomatic fallout over Russia's decision to
grant him temporary asylum.

The American ambassador here, Michael A. McFaul, met Friday with one of
President Vladimir V. Putin's senior aides to discuss the ''new status'' of Mr.
Snowden, but also a range of other international issues, including cuts in
nuclear stockpiles, missile defense and the conflict in Syria. The American
Embassy announced the ambassador's meeting with the aide, Yuri V. Ushakov, in a
posting on its Twitter account in Russian, but embassy officials declined to
elaborate on the discussions.

Mr. Ushakov previously said Mr. Snowden's case was not important enough to
derail Russia's overall relationship with the United States, and the inclusion
of other topics suggested that the administration was trying to gauge whether
cooperation was still possible in advance of planned meetings between Mr. Obama
and Mr. Putin in September.

On Thursday, after Mr. Snowden walked out of an airport transit zone where he
had remained for five weeks after arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23,
the White House protested and questioned the utility of the planned summit
meeting between the two leaders in Moscow. The White House stopped short of
announcing that Mr. Obama would cancel it.

A senior Russian lawmaker, Igor N. Morozov, said Friday that he could not rule
out the possibility Mr. Snowden might leave Russian territory before the end of
the month, resolving at least in part the latest irritant in relations.

''This temporary decision leaves the Russian side a certain space for
maneuvering, including the possibility to organize the movement of Snowden to
another country,'' Mr. Morozov, the chairman of the foreign affairs committee of
the upper house of Parliament, told the Interfax news agency. ''The Russian side
is interested in Snowden leaving our territory, and this whole story is not a
reason for worsening relations with the United States.''

By Friday evening, the Kremlin had made no official statement about Mr.
Snowden's fate, though Mr. Putin had ample opportunity to make remarks as he
fielded questions from supporters attending an annual youth camp at Seliger Lake
northwest of Moscow. None of the questioners in what is typically a scripted
encounter with the public broached the controversy, nor did Mr. Putin raise it.

Mr. Snowden's whereabouts also remained a mystery. The Russian lawyer who
handled Mr. Snowden's appeal for temporary asylum, Anatoly G. Kucherena, said
Mr. Snowden had found a place to live but declined to say where, or even to
specify whether it was in Moscow. He said Mr. Snowden continued to mull his next
steps, understanding that his situation remained far from settled legally.

''As you know, he is receiving threats from the United States government every
day,'' Mr. Kucherena said. ''The situation is heating up.''

Mr. Snowden had previously indicated that he hoped to receive political asylum
in Latin America, possibly Bolivia, Ecuador or Venezuela. An official at the
Venezuelan Embassy said officials there had had no contact with Mr. Snowden
since his release. Officials at the embassies of Bolivia and Ecuador declined to
comment.

Mr. Kucherena added that Mr. Snowden had agreed informally to the condition that
Mr. Putin set for staying in Russia, though he had made no written statement to
that effect. ''If he wants to stay here,'' Mr. Putin said in July, ''there is
one condition: he must stop his work aimed at inflicting damage on our American
partners, strange as it sounds from my lips.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/03/world/europe/us-and-russia-snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Edward J. Snowden left a Moscow airport Thursday with Sarah
Harrison of WikiLeaks, left
his lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, third from left
 and an aide. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROSSIYA 24, VIA REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                            August 3, 2013 Saturday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Snowden clouds US-Putin talks

BYLINE: PAUL SONNE, ADAM ENTOUS

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1031  words


RUSSIA'S granting of a year's asylum to National Security Agency leaker Edward
Snowden has drawn scorn from across the US political spectrum, Washington
threatening to scale back diplomatic relations.

Politicians said the move was a slap in the face and called for retaliatory
measures from the White House.

``We are extremely disappointed that the Russian government would take this step
despite our very clear and lawful request'' to have him expelled, said White
House spokesman Jay Carney.

He directly acknowledged for the first time that the administration was
considering pulling out of a summit meeting in Moscow between President Barack
Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin next month.

US officials had viewed the bilateral meeting as an important moment in a
months-long drive to find common ground with Russia on foreign policy goals,
such as ending the war in Syria.

``We are evaluating the utility of a summit,'' Mr Carney said.

The Obama administration stopped short of announcing immediate punitive
measures, reflecting the US's reluctance to jeopardise co-operation with Russia
in other areas, and underscoring the limits to its international leverage.

The diplomatic maelstrom started when Russia granted Mr Snowden temporary
asylum, which lasts for one year but is renewable.

It allows him to live, work and travel in Russia, and he has left Moscow's
Sheremetyevo airport, where he had been stuck since June 23.

``He has left for a safe place,'' his Russian lawyer Anatoly Kucherena said.

``He can live in a hotel or rent an apartment,'' he told state television.
``Seeing as he is the most wanted person on earth, he today will also be
focusing on questions of his own security.''

For the 30-year-old former security contractor -- wanted by US authorities for
espionage after leaking documents related to the NSA's foreign and domestic
surveillance operations -- Russia's hospitality could prove a mixed blessing.
The Kremlin has demanded he cease his ``political activities'' in order to stay
in the country.

Officials are concerned he has additional information about how the US
penetrates foreign government computers, and may barter it for favour from
Moscow.

Mr Snowden thanked Russia in a statement released by WikiLeaks. ``Over the past
eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no respect for
international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning,'' he said.

Republican senator John McCain called Russia's latest move ``a disgrace and a
deliberate effort to embarrass the United States'' and said the relationship
needed to be rethought.

Though both the White House and the Kremlin have said they don't want the
Snowden affair to hurt US-Russian relations, it has overshadowed recent efforts
to mend tattered ties.

``This situation is too insignificant to affect political relations,'' said
Kremlin foreign policy aide Yuri Ushakov.

US politicians saw it differently. ``Russia's stabbed us in the back and every
day that Snowden is allowed to be free they twist the knife further,'' Democrat
senator Chuck Schumer said.

``Now that Snowden has been set free, I don't think the G20 should be meeting in
Russia and I think we should not participate if they do.''

Maryland congressman CA ``Dutch'' Ruppersberger, the top Democrat on the house
intelligence committee, called the asylum decision a ``slap in the face'', but
said the US needed Russian co-operation on Syria.

Mr Ruppersberger said he believed Mr Snowden had already provided all his
information to both the Chinese and Russian governments, which is why they
allowed him to go free, and that information would help them evade US spying
efforts in future.

Mr Putin, a former agent of the KGB -- an agency with a fundamentally dim view
towards leaking -- has refrained from expressing support for Mr Snowden's
actions. But his assertion of Russia's strength internationally is sure to play
well at home.

DIARY OF A WHISTLEBLOWER

JUNE 5: The Guardian reveals the existence of a secret US court order forcing US
telephone company Verizon to provide the National Security Agency with daily
information on its customers' calls, from April to July

JUNE 6: The Washington Post and The Guardian report that the NSA and the FBI
have access to servers of major internet companies such as Microsoft, Yahoo!,
Google and Facebook to monitor the web traffic of people outside the US

JUNE 9: US authorities announce an investigation; Edward Snowden, hiding in Hong
Kong since May 20, outs himself as the source

JUNE 21: Snowden is charged with espionage by US authorities, who ask officials
in Hong Kong to arrest him

JUNE 22: In the South China Morning Post, Snowden says the US government has
also hacked Chinese mobile phone companies to gather millions of text messages

JUNE 23: Snowden flies to Moscow; Russian President Vladimir Putin says he is in
the transit zone at Sheremetyevo Airport; US revokes his passport

JUNE 24: A Russian plane expected to carry Snowden to Cuba leaves Moscow without
him on board, sending dozens of journalists on a 12-hour wild-goose chase

JUNE 30: Der Spiegel says the EU was another target of Washington's spy program,
angering European officials

JULY 1: Putin says Snowden is welcome to stay in Russia if he stops leaking;
WikiLeaks reveals he has sent asylum requests to 21 nations, most of which
refuse immediately

JULY 3: A flight carrying Bolivian President Evo Morales is forced to stop in
Vienna, over suspicions he was travelling with Snowden

JULY 5: Bolivia, Nicaragua and Venezuela offer to take him

JULY 12: Snowden says he wants to claim asylum in Russia until he can go legally
to Latin America; White House warns Moscow not to give Snowden a 'propaganda
platform'

JULY 15: Putin accuses the US of 'trapping' Snowden in Moscow

JULY 19: A secret US court renews the government's authority to pursue the
controversial phone surveillance program

JULY 23: Attorney-General Eric Holder tells Moscow that Washington will not seek
the death penalty nor torture Snowden if he is returned

AUGUST 1: Snowden receives one year's asylum in Russia and leaves Sheremetyevo
airport for an undisclosed location

AUGUST 2: White House threatens to pull out of pre-G20 talks in Moscow

Source: AFP

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              41 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                             August 2, 2013 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Snowden wins asylum, leaves Russian airport

BYLINE: Moscow

SECTION: A; Pg. A013

LENGTH: 503  words


Snowden wins asylum, leaves Russian airport Moscow GONE: Edward Snowden.

Fugitive US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden has left the Moscow airport where
he had been holed up for over a month, after being granted a year's asylum in
Russia, his lawyer says.

"Snowden has left Sheremetyevo airport. He has just been given a certificate
that he has been awarded temporary asylum in Russia for one year," his lawyer
Anatoly Kucherena said on Thursday.

An airport spokeswoman added he had left within the past two hours. A source
told the Interfax news agency he had crossed the Russian border for the first
time.

Kucherena said Snowden had left in a normal taxi on his own.

The lawyer added Snowden's new place of residence would be kept secret for
security reasons."His location is not being made public for security reasons
since he is the most pursued man on the planet.

"He himself will decide where he will go," Mr Kucherena said.

Snowden, 30, is wanted on felony charges by the United States after leaking
details of vast US surveillance programs, but Russia has refused to extradite
him.

Interviewed by Rossiya 24 television on Thursday, Mr Kucherena held up a scanned
copy of Snowden's certificate granting him a year's temporary asylum in Russia.

"He has gone to a safe place.

I hope you will be understanding about this information," he told the television
station.

Snowden has been staying in the transit zone of the Sheremetyevo airport outside
Moscow since he flew in from Hong Kong on June 23 and has never formally crossed
the Russian border.

His receiving asylum status in Russia came two days after US soldier Bradley
Manning was convicted of espionage on Tuesday for leaking US secrets to
anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks.

"Edward Snowden has successfully acquired refugee status in Russia and will
shortly leave the airport," WikiLeaks, which has supported Snowden, said on
Twitter.

It said he was still "under the care" of WikiLeaks British staffer Sarah
Harrison who flew in with him from Hong Kong and is believed to have been with
him ever since.

Awarding him asylum in Russia risks a diplomatic row with the United States,
which had previously described such a prospect as "deeply disappointing".But
President Vladimir Putin's foreign policy adviser, Yury Ushakov, said the
situation should not affect relations with Washington, Interfax reported.

Meanwhile, officials in the Obama administration face deepening scepticism over
the National Security Agency surveillance program that collects millions of
Americans' phone records, even as they declassified documents in an attempt to
deflect criticism.

The previously secret material - a court order and reports to Congress - was
released by National Intelligence Director James Clapper, as a Senate judiciary
committee hearing opened on Wednesday in which legislators questioned the bulk
collection of phone records.

A senior NSA official conceded the surveillance had been the primary tool in
thwarting one plot - not the dozens that officials had previously suggested.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CTD1


       Copyright 2013 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              42 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

Snowden leaves airport as Russia grants him a year's asylum: Relations between
Putin and Obama hit new low The law is winning in the end, says whistleblower

BYLINE: Alec Luhn in Moscow, Luke Harding and Paul Lewis in Washington

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 735 words


The White House expressed anger and dismay yesterday after Russia granted
temporary asylum to the American whistleblower Edward Snowden and allowed him to
leave the Moscow airport where he had been holed up for more than a month. White
House spokesman Jay Carney said the US was extremely disappointed by the
decision, almost certainly taken personally by President Vladimir Putin.

Carney said Moscow should hand Snowden back and hinted that Barack Obama might
boycott a meeting with Putin in September, when the US president travels to
Russia for a G20 summit.

Carney said Snowden had arrived in China and then Russia carrying with him
thousands of top secret US documents.

He said: "Simply the possession of that kind of highly sensitive classified
information outside of secure areas is both a huge risk and a violation. As we
know he's been in Russia now for many weeks. There is a huge risk associated
with . . . removing that information from secure areas. You shouldn't do it, you
can't do it, it's wrong."

With US-Russian relations now at a cold war-style low, Snowden slipped out of
Sheremetyevo airport yesterday afternoon. His lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, said
Russia's federal migration service had granted him temporary asylum for one
year. Kucherena said the 30-year-old had found shelter in a private home of
American expatriates.

Putin made no immediate comment but, having weighed Russia's options for some
weeks, he appears to have decided that Snowden's propaganda value outweighs any
possible US repercussions. Obama's already floundering attempts to "reset", or
improve, relations with Moscow are in effect over.

In a statement released by WikiLeaks, Snowden thanked the Russian authorities
and accused the US of behaving illegally: "Over the past eight weeks, we have
seen the Obama administration show no respect for international or domestic law,
but in the end the law is winning."

Snowden has been given a temporary Russian travel document, with his name in
Cyrillic and a fresh passport photograph. This gave him the right to temporary
asylum on the territory of the Russian Federation, Kucherena said, holding up a
copy of the document. US authorities had cancelled his American passport.

Kucherena said his client was looking to settle down and get a job . He said: "
Snowden is an expert, a very high-level expert and I am receiving letters from
companies and citizens who would eagerly give him a job. He will not have any
problems. He needs to work. He is not a rich man, and the money that he had, he
has of course, spent on food. Of course, he understands that he has to work and
he has to keep on living."

Snowden was offered a job by Russia's top social networking site just hours
after he received asylum.

Security officials said Snowden officially crossed the border into Russia from
the airport's transit zone at about 3.30pm local time. Russia had apparently not
informed the US of the move in advance. The state TV channel Rossiya 24 showed a
photograph of Snowden's departure as he clambered into a grey unmarked car.

Despite being pictured from behind, Snowden was instantly recognisable wearing
his trademark grey shirt and carrying a black backpack. Next to him was Sarah
Harrison, the WikiLeaks representative who accompanied him last month on his
flight from Hong Kong.

Snowden's lawyer gave fresh details of how his client had spent the past 40 days
while waiting for the Kremlin to determine his fate. The American had little to
do apart from surf the internet and read, Kucherena said.

He said he had chosen a number of classic books to help Snowden understand the
mentality of the Russian people: Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, which
Snowden quickly finished, a collection of stories by Chekhov and writings by the
19th-century historian Nikolai Karamzin. Kucherena also gave Snowden an alphabet
book to help him to start learning Russian.

Snowden was not able to go outside - "he breathes disgusting air, the air of the
airport," Kucherena said - but nevertheless remained in good health and told his
lawyer he had "been in worse circumstances".

"It's hard for him, when he's always in a state of expectation," Kucherena said.
"On the inside, Edward is absolutely independent, he absolutely follows his
convictions. As for the reaction, he is convinced and genuinely believes he did
it first of all so that Americans and all people would find out that they are
spying on us."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              43 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       August 2, 2013 Friday 3:36 PM GMT

Russia grants NSA PRISM whistleblower Edward Snowden a year's asylum;
'Most wanted man on Earth' leaves Moscow airport for secret safe house after
agreeing to stop leaking US information

BYLINE: Kevin Rawlinson

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 718 words


The former computer analyst turned whistleblower who revealed widespread
surveillance by the United States finally left Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport
after being granted temporary asylum by Russia.

Edward Snowden left the airport after more than a month of being holed-up in the
transit area, unable to leave the country due to the threat of deportation to
America.

Mr Snowden's lawyer said he had agreed to Russian President Vladimir Putin's
requests to stop leaking the sort of documents which have caused embarrassment
to the US authorities. The whistleblower called the development a victory for
the rule of law.

"Over the past eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no respect
for international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning. I thank
the Russian Federation for granting me asylum," he said in a statement released
by anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks.

According to his lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, Mr Snowden has moved to a secret safe
house more than a month after he first touched down on Russian soil.

He is a fugitive in the eyes of US authorities, who have made it clear that they
wish to detain him for leaking details of its far-reaching surveillance
programmes. A collection of documents Mr Snowden obtained while working for the
National Security Agency (NSA) has sparked worldwide interest and drew criticism
from countries the US is thought to have spied on.

However, despite writing to the governments of countries across the world -
including Russia - asking for protection, the 30-year-old former NSA contractor
remained isolated and trapped airside at the airport until today.

And, despite the almost constant interest in his case from across the world, he
managed to give journalists the slip as he left in a taxi.

According to Reuters, Mr Snowden's lawyer said his client, whom he called the
"most wanted man on planet Earth", took a taxi from the airport after being
handed a "certificate on getting refugee status in the Russian Federation". Mr
Kucherena added that Mr Snowden is free to live in Russia and that the location
of his home would remain secret because "the issue of security is very important
for him".

An image purporting to show the certificate soon appeared on Russian television.
It revealed that Mr Snowden has been granted asylum for a year from Thursday 31
July.

Mr Kucherena added that his client would not be housed in an embassy building,
despite three South American countries offering to take him in. Some of the
other countries approached by Mr Snowden, whose US passport was revoked by
Washington, told him that he would need to be on their sovereign territory in
order to make a valid claim for asylum.

With only a year of guaranteed safety in Russia, that option may remain
attractive to him, although his new documents reportedly prohibit him from
leaving Russia.

When he first landed, Russian authorities refused to admit Mr Snowden and told
him to cease his whistleblowing activities as a condition of being allowed to
stay. However, they were equally disinclined to intervene on behalf of the US,
which demanded Mr Snowden be handed over.

According to the Associated Press, Mr Snowden has now agreed to Mr Putin's
demands.

White House spokesman Jay Carney said the US authorities saw the development as
"unfortunate", adding: "We are extremely disappointed by it". And he said that
the White House was reviewing the decision to hold a meeting between Presidents
Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin.

After he landed in Moscow, it initially looked likely that Mr Snowden would
follow WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange into the welcoming arms of Ecuador. The
WikiLeaks representative Sarah Harrison was dispatched to Moscow, as was an
Ecuadorean diplomat. But a travel document handed over by the South American
nation was soon withdrawn and the Ecuadorean government appeared to turn away
from the idea of helping Mr Snowden.

Mr Snowden was still accompanied by Ms Harrison as he left the airport,
according to Wikileaks. On Twitter, the group wrote: "We would like to thank the
Russian people and all those others who have helped to protect Mr. Snowden. We
have won the battle - now the war."

Mr Snowden's father, Lonnie Snowden, who had previously stated his belief that
his son should come home, said he now believed Edward should stay in Russia.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              48 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                             August 2, 2013 Friday
                                 First Edition

Whistleblower Edward Snowden given asylum for a year by Russia;
'Most wanted man on Earth' leaves Moscow airport for secret safe house after
agreeing to stop leaking US information. By Kevin Rawlinson

BYLINE: KEVIN RAWLINSON

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 820 words


The former computer analyst turned whistleblower who revealed widespread
surveillance by the United States finally left Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport
yesterday after being granted temporary asylum by Russia.

Edward Snowden left the airport after more than a month of being holed-up in the
transit area, unable to leave the country due to the threat of deportation to
America.

Mr Snowden's lawyer said he had agreed to Russian President Vladimir Putin's
requests to stop leaking the sort of documents which have caused embarrassment
to the US authorities. The whistleblower called the development a victory for
the rule of law.

"Over the past eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no respect
for international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning. I thank
the Russian Federation for granting me asylum," he said in a statement released
by anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks.

According to his lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, Mr Snowden has moved to a secret safe
house more than a month after he first touched down on Russian soil.

He is a fugitive in the eyes of US authorities, who have made it clear that they
wish to detain him for leaking details of its far-reaching surveillance
programmes. A collection of documents Mr Snowden obtained while working for the
National Security Agency (NSA) has sparked worldwide interest and drew criticism
from countries the US is thought to have spied on.

However, despite writing to the governments of countries across the world -
including Russia - asking for protection, the 30-year-old former NSA contractor
remained isolated and trapped airside at the airport until yesterday.

And, despite the almost constant interest in his case from across the world, he
managed to give journalists the slip as he left in a taxi yesterday.

According to Reuters, Mr Snowden's lawyer said his client, whom he called the
"most wanted man on planet Earth", took a taxi from the airport after being
handed a "certificate on getting refugee status in the Russian Federation". Mr
Kucherena added that Mr Snowden is free to live in Russia and that the location
of his home would remain secret because "the issue of security is very important
for him".

An image purporting to show the certificate soon appeared on Russian television.
It revealed that Mr Snowden has been granted asylum for a year from Thursday 31
July.

Mr Kucherena added that his client would not be housed in an embassy building,
despite three South American countries offering to take him in. Some of the
other countries approached by Mr Snowden, whose US passport was revoked by
Washington, told him that he would need to be on their sovereign territory in
order to make a valid claim for asylum.

With only a year of guaranteed safety in Russia, that option may remain
attractive to him, although his new documents reportedly prohibit him from
leaving Russia.

When he first landed, Russian authorities refused to admit Mr Snowden and told
him to cease his whistleblowing activities as a condition of being allowed to
stay. However, they were equally disinclined to intervene on behalf of the US,
which demanded Mr Snowden be handed over.

According to the Associated Press, Mr Snowden has now agreed to Mr Putin's
demands.

White House spokesman Jay Carney said the US authorities saw the development as
"unfortunate", adding: "We are extremely disappointed by it". And he said that
the White House was reviewing the decision to hold a meeting between Presidents
Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin.

After he landed in Moscow, it initially looked likely that Mr Snowden would
follow WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange into the welcoming arms of Ecuador. The
WikiLeaks representative Sarah Harrison was dispatched to Moscow, as was an
Ecuadorean diplomat. But a travel document handed over by the South American
nation was soon withdrawn and the Ecuadorean government appeared to turn away
from the idea of helping Mr Snowden.

Mr Snowden was still accompanied by Ms Harrison as he left the airport
yesterday, according to Wikileaks. On Twitter, the group wrote: "We would like
to thank the Russian people and all those others who have helped to protect Mr.
Snowden. We have won the battle - now the war."

Mr Snowden's father, Lonnie Snowden, who had previously stated his belief that
his son should come home, said he now believed Edward should stay in Russia.

GLOBAL PURSUIT

THE FUGITIVE

20 MAY

Edward Snowden, 29, arrives in Hong Kong from Hawaii, after taking leave from
his National Security Agency contracting firm Booz Allen Hamilton.

He identifies himself as the source of leaked information about NSA surveillance
methods on 9 June.

23 JUNE

Snowden flies to Russia a day after the US government charged him with espionage
and asked Hong Kong to extradite him. He becomes stranded in the transit zone of
a Moscow airport after the US revokes his passport.

1 AUGUST

Snowden leaves the Moscow airport after Russia grants asylum for one year.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2013 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              49 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

Snowden gets year's asylum from Russia;
A defiant Moscow grants refugee status to leaker of U.S. surveillance secrets

BYLINE: ANDREW E. KRAMER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1469 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

Edward J. Snowden, wanted by the United States over leaks about surveillance
programs, left the Moscow airport where he had been in legal limbo for more than
month.

FULL TEXT

Brushing aside pleas and warnings from President Barack Obama and other senior
American officials, Russia has granted Edward J. Snowden temporary asylum and
allowed him to walk free out of a Moscow airport transit zone on Thursday,
ending his legal limbo there after more than five weeks.

Mr. Snowden, the former intelligence analyst wanted by the United States for
leaking details of the National Security Agency's surveillance programs, thanked
Russia in a statement issued by WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy organization that
has been assisting him. He accused the United States of disregarding the law in
its global hunt to arrest him and said that ''in the end, the law is winning.''

Russia's decision, which infuriated U.S. officials, significantly altered the
legal status of Mr. Snowden. Even as those leaks continued, Mr. Snowden now has
legal permission to live - and conceivably even work - anywhere in Russia for as
long as a year, safely out of the reach of American prosecutors.

Mr. Snowden, 30, departed Sheremetyevo Airport unexpectedly at 3:30 in the
afternoon after his lawyer, Anatoly G. Kucherena, delivered to him a
passport-like document issued by the Federal Migration Service on Wednesday and
valid until July 31, 2014.

Mr. Kucherena said he would not disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Snowden, though
he expected Mr. Snowden could make a public appearance soon. ''I cannot give out
details,'' he said.

Mr. Snowden left the airport's transit zone alone, an airport official said, but
WikiLeaks later announced that he had left with one of the organization's
representatives, Sarah Harrison, who apparently had remained with him since his
flight began in Hong Kong in June.

''We are extremely disappointed that the Russian Federation would take this
step,'' the White House press secretary, Jay Carney, said in Washington.
''Obviously, this is not a positive development.''

Mr. Carney said Mr. Obama had not decided whether to cancel a planned a trip to
Moscow in September but he strongly suggested he would. ''We are evaluating the
utility of a summit,'' he said.

Mr. Snowden, the spokesman said, was not a ''whistle-blower,'' as his supporters
contend but someone who has been indicted on felony charges of leaking
classified information. Mr. Carney said the Russian decision ''undermines a long
history of law enforcement cooperation,'' mostly recently on the Boston Marathon
bombings.

American lawmakers have called for harsh retaliation against Russia, even a
boycott of the Winter Olympic Games to be held in Sochi.

Although President Vladimir V. Putin and Mr. Obama both sought to avoid a direct
diplomatic clash over Mr. Snowden, Mr. Putin and other officials in Russia made
clear that they would under no circumstance extradite him, despite direct
appeals from Secretary of State John Kerry and Attorney General Eric H. Holder
Jr.

As recently as this week, American officials remained hopeful that some sort of
agreement to return Mr. Snowden to the United States could be reached, according
to officials in Washington and Moscow.

One of Mr. Putin's aides, Yuri V. Ushakov, said on Thursday that Mr. Snowden's
fate was of ''insignificant character'' and thus would not affect relations,
according to the state news agency RIA Novosti. He added that the Kremlin was
aware that Mr. Obama might cancel his trip to Moscow but had received no
official notification from officials in Washington.

Mr. Putin, who spent the day at his official residence on the outskirts of
Moscow, meeting with the president of Tajikistan, learned of Mr. Snowden's
release on Thursday, according to the Kremlin's spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov. He
added that the decision had been made by immigration officials and not by Mr.
Putin, though it is widely assumed here that any decision with such potentially
severe diplomatic consequences would require approval from within the Kremlin.

''It has nothing to do with the president or his administration,'' Mr. Peskov
said in a telephone interview.

The Kremlin, he said, continued to assume Mr. Obama would visit Moscow to meet
with Mr. Putin after attending the annual summit of the Group of 20 nations in
St. Petersburg in early September. And while Mr. Peskov said that Russia
believed in the importance of relations for regional and global security, he
shifted the burden of sustaining the relationship onto the Obama administration.
''You cannot dance tango alone,'' he said.

Mr. Putin, for his part, has sent contradictory signals during the course of the
Snowden case, which began eight weeks ago when Mr. Snowden was hiding in Hong
Kong and then flew to Moscow on June 23, one step ahead of an extradition
request by the Justice Department.

The Russian leader suggested early on that Mr. Snowden should leave Russia
quickly and later called him an ''unwanted Christmas present,'' though he blamed
the Obama administration for stranding him in Moscow by revoking his passport
and pressuring other countries to block any efforts by him to seek exile in
Ecuador, Bolivia and other Latin American countries that have said they would
consider accepting him.

Mr. Snowden could still decide to seek permanent asylum in another country. Mr.
Kucherena, the lawyer, Mr. Snowden had not officially applied for permanent
political asylum in Russia and could simply remain until he was able to fly
elsewhere.

Mr. Snowden's departure from the airport on Thursday set off frenzied news media
speculation about his whereabouts - with one specious report that he was headed
to a notorious expatriate bar known as the Hungry Duck that had in fact closed.
Where he was or would stay remained unclear on Thursday evening.

His presence in Russia has been cheered by many here who, like those in the
United States and other countries, have defended his decision to leak the
secrets of American surveillance. Ivan I. Melnikov, a senior Communist Party
member of Parliament and a candidate for mayor of Moscow in next month's
election, called him a hero.

''Frankly speaking,'' Mr. Melnikov said, according to the Interfax news agency,
''he is a also like a balm to the hearts of all Russian patriots.''

Pavel Durov, the founder of the most prominent Russian online social network,
VKontakte, even invited Mr. Snowden to join his company and help to create new
security measures. ''Snowden might be interested in working to protect the
personal data of millions of our users,'' he wrote.

Ludmila Alekseyevna, the head of the Russian Helsinki Committee, told Russian
news organizations that she welcomed the government's decision to grant Mr.
Snowden temporary refugee status. ''I am satisfied that this happened and that
Snowden received asylum in Russia,'' Interfax quoted her as saying.

Beyond the temporary refugee certificate, it was unclear whether the Russian
government would play any formal role in sheltering Mr. Snowden, like providing
housing, which might be seen as a further affront to the United States.

Mr. Kucherena took pains to say that he had not helped Mr. Snowden with a place
to stay outside the airport and suggested that Mr. Snowden had made his own
arrangements. ''Questions of his security and questions of his living
arrangements, all of that is up to him,'' Mr. Kucherena told the Interfax news
agency. ''He will take care of this himself.''

In a Twitter posting, WikiLeaks said: ''We would like to thank the Russian
people and all those others who have helped to protect Mr. Snowden. We have won
the battle - now the war.''

WikiLeaks later quoted Mr. Snowden as thanking the Russians ''for granting me
asylum in accordance with its laws and international obligations.''

''Over the past eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no
respect for international or domestic law,'' the statement quoted him saying,
''but in the end, the law is winning.''

For the Kremlin, the episode has offered an opportunity to take the moral high
ground on an issue with global resonance, in addition to whatever intelligence
benefits the security services might have gained.

Governments in Europe have also objected to the surveillance practices Mr.
Snowden revealed, Robert Schlegel, a member of the committee on information
policy in Parliament and a member of the pro-government United Russia political
party, said in a telephone interview.

''Will Obama cancel meetings with their leaders, too?'' Mr. Schlegel said. ''The
United States is a government that positions itself as favoring freedom of
speech and democracy, and yet it keeps the rest of world under surveillance, and
now the rest of the world knows. People in Russia sympathize with Snowden. He
had the will and the bravery to go against the Matrix.''

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              50 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      August 2, 2013 Friday 10:39 AM GMT+4

Russian Press Review

LENGTH: 1686 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW August 2


-

On Thursday, the US former analyst of intelligence services Edward Snowden, who
had remained at the Sheremetyevo airport's transit zone over a month, received
Russia's temporary asylum for a year.

The Kommersant quotes the State Duma's deputy Vyacheslav Nikonov explaining
Moscow's reasons for the decision: "If we have not granted the temporary asylum
to Snowden, the Russian Federation would have been taken into any consideration,
and first of all by the Americans."

Head of the State Duma's International Affairs Committee Alexei Pushkov is sure
the crisis originated from the US, the newspaper writes. "Despite Obama's
statement he would not land a plane because of some 29-year-old hacker, they did
block Snowden's way and deprived him of an opportunity of a safe flight, by
having stopped the plane of Bolivia's president. Now, Snowden may remain in
Russia forever," he said.

The Kremlin tried to lower the importance of what had happened: the president's
aide Yuri Ushakov said the case of Snowden is not important enough to influence
the relations between the Russian Federation and the United States.

However, Washington, the newspaper continues, thinks differently. The US
presidential press secretary for the first time confirmed officially the
decision of the Russian authorities would affect directly Barack Obama's plans
to meet with Vladimir Putin on the eve of the G20 summit in St. Petersburg.

However, American experts say a decision to annul the meeting would be an
"unprecedented step." Nothing of the kind has happened since the cold war times,
said a former US National Intelligence Officer, Professor of Government and
Foreign Service at Georgetown University Angela Stent.

The US have been demonstrating how important it is for them to have Snowden
undergo the American court. Remember the case with the plane of the Bolivian
president, Samuel Charap of the Washington branch of the International Strategic
Research Institute told the Kommersant. Whenever the Russian authorities refuse
to cooperate on the issue, they send a clear signal: what you care about so much
is of no importance to us, we shall do the opposite. With countries of the kind,
the US president will not speak or work actively, he said.

The view is shared by Russian experts.

"Moscow's decision to grant an asylum to Snowden demonstrates that President
Putin is not going to pay to the US the price he considers to be too high," Head
of the Moscow Carnegie Centre Dmitry Trenin said. "This puts President Obama
into a complicated situation. Thus, the basis, where the US may continue
speaking to the Russian Federation, is getting narrower. It is not correct the
relations between Moscow and Washington will be curtailed, but clearly they will
not be able to spread from now on."

Russia's oldest human rights activist, leader of the Moscow Helsinki Group
Ludmila Alekseyeva welcomed Russia's decision to grant a temporary asylum to
Snowden, the Nezavisimaya Gazeta writes. "I am satisfied with what has happened,
and with the fact Snowden has received an asylum in this country," she said.
However, she regretted that "Snowden, who has been fighting for his freedom and
rights, turned out to be in the country, where those are not observed."
Alekseyeva added that several days earlier the Moscow Helsinki Group had written
a letter to the US President Barack Obama, where they asked not to follow the
people like Snowden, who had been fighting for human rights.

The RBC daily says, the CIA's former employee may find an employment for
himself. Director General of the VKontakte social network Pavel Durov invited
Edward Snowden to join the social network's "team of star IT experts."

"Today, Edward Snowden - the person, who revealed the crimes of the American
intelligent services against people across the world, - has received a temporary
asylum in Russia. In times like this, we feel pride for this country and we are
sorry about the trend followed by the US - the country, which betrays the
principles, which years ago were put into its bases," Pavel Durov wrote on his
page on VKontakte. "We are inviting Edward Snowden to Petersburg and will be
happy if he joins the team of our star IT experts. I believe, Edward may find it
interesting to be involved in protection of personal data of millions of our
users."

VKontakte's Press Secretary Georgy Lobushkin says Snowden may take any place he
likes. But most probably he may prefer the sixth floor, where programmers are
working.

The American authorities would not leave alone the company, if it hires Snowden,
the Vedomosti quote BNP Paribas' Chief Economist Yulia Tseplyaeva as saying.

For any company, employment of Snowden would mean problems with doing businesses
with the US, Managing Partner at Ashmanov and Partners, Igor Ashmanov said. It
is doubtful Snowden, as a special agent with no experience as a programme, may
be of any assistance to VKontakte.

Ashmanov says Durov invited Snowden to tease the Americans and to promote his
network abroad: "It is a stormy global PR exercise."

X X X

Vladimir Putin meets with Tajikistan's president

On Thursday, Russia's President Vladimir Putin received at his Novo-Ogarevo
residence the counterpart from Tajikistan - Emomali Rakhmon. The two presidents
discussed the future of the Russian military base, the situation around migrants
and the reduced trade turnover. Rakhmon promised in autumn the country's
parliament would ratify the agreement on conditions for extension of terms for
the Russian 201st military base.

The Nezavisimaya Gazeta writes in response Emomali Rakhmon hopes for the
Kremlin's support both in general and over the upcoming presidential election.
Dushanbe may consider the very meeting between Putin and Rakhmon as Moscow's
support at the upcoming presidential election in Tajikistan. And, possibly, he
really managed to hear in Moscow what he had expected to hear. However, he had
arrived to Moscow exclusively with the affirmation in loyalty, which, in fact,
is not based on anything. But, it looks like the Russian side is ready to
believe him once again.

"In the real politics, Russia now has only one priority - to help keeping the
current regimes on the post-Soviet space and in countries to the south of
Russia, to support them to the utmost, to support them in issues aimed at
improvement of their national security. The task to keep the present authorities
- regardless of their democratic approaches' levels and practically regardless
of whether they are Russia's allies in the union relations of the Eurasian
integration or only support the format of bilateral relations, - comes from the
objective to provide Russia's own security," the newspaper quotes Head of the
Association of Border Cooperation Alexander Sobyanin as saying. First of all
this is true about Tajikistan.

"The presidential and the governmental authorities in Moscow realise that
Tajikistan is a weak link in the region, and thus Russia will support whatever
official Dushanbe is asking for, regarding its security," the expert said.

Unclear remain the situation around the agreements of the previous year, where
Putin and Rakhmon signed an agreement to extend the term for the 201st military
base in the territory of Tajikistan to 2042, Alexei Sobyanin said.

Russia has numerous interests in Tajikistan, but he main one is the extension of
the agreement on the deployment of the military base, which still had not passed
all necessary formalities in Dushanbe, the Komsomolskaya Pravda reports. This
was the topic to open Vladimir Putin's statement for the media. "We have paid
special attention to coming into the legal force of the Agreement on extension
of the term of the Russian military base in Tajikistan," the Russian president
said. "Russia has completed all necessary procedures, and Tajikistan is close to
finalise his procedures. We share common understanding that quite soon we shall
be able to begin the implementation of this major document."

X X X

Anti-piracy law enters legal force in Russia

On August 1, came into the legal force the "anti-pirate" law, which allows upon
court decisions to close the Internet sites for illegally placed films.
Punishment will be applicable only distributers of the pirate content.
Authorities will block an IP address, which may host thousand other resources.
The law allows suspending work of a resource even if it only contains a link to
a pirate resource. Russia's Pirate Party organised protests against the law. On
Thursday, about 2,000 did not work. The site of the Russian public initiative
has collected over 60,000 votes against the law. Those who do not admit the law
have begun collecting signatures to repeal the law. On Thursday, the Internet
site of Roscomnadzor, which should have registered complaints from copyright
holders, was down.

Before the anti-pirate law came into force in Russia, the right holders had been
losing about three billion dollars a year, the Nezavisimaya Gazeta writes.

The Business Software Alliance /BSA/ says in only this market segment in 2011
the damage from unlicensed software made 63.4 billion dollars. The share of this
country was 3.2 billion. On the black list, Russia keeps the third rating
following the US and China.

BSA's analysts say - the share of pirate software in the Russian Federation in
2011 made 63 percent of the entire installed software. The damage, which films'
literature's and music's copyright holders are fixing is even higher. The
experts say their losses reach 300 billion dollars a year.

Experts speak about the anti-pirate law as about a benchmark. However, besides
the advantages, they highlight possible negative consequences. Zlatcombank's CEO
Alexei Shitov did not rule out the initiative, which is actually aimed to
protect rights, may turn out to become censorship, the Nezavisimaya Gazeta
reports. "The law is not finalised, as many details are not included there.
Thus, it will not be implemented effectively. The regulation, which the law's
authors offer, is fighting not pirates, but the general Internet users. Should
they want, pirates will always be able to find ways to get over a block," Shitov
said.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              51 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      August 2, 2013 Friday 04:21 AM GMT+4

Snowden situation not significant enough to affect Russia-US relations -aide

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: NOVO OGAREVO August 2


- The situation surrounding National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden's
stay in Russia is not significant enough to affect political relations between
the two countries, presidential aide Yuri Ushakov said.

He said Russia has received no signal about a possible cancellation of U.S.
President Barack Obama's visit to Moscow this autumn because of the Snowden
affair.

"We know what kind of background is forming [around the Snowden situation] in
America, but we have not received any signals from the American authorities,"
the aide said.

"We are interested to develop relations in all areas," he added.

On Thursday, August 1, Snowden was granted temporary asylum in Russia for one
year. His Russian lawyer Anatoly Kucherena confirmed that Snowden had left the
transit zone in Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport but could not say where he was
going. "I cannot say where Snowden is now," he said.

Kucherena said Snowden was not prepared to face the fact that he would be
granted the asylum on Thursday. "He was not prepared for this to happen today. I
cannot say that it took him long to pack up and leave the transit zone. He had
only a few things, no suitcases to pack," he told Russia 24 television.

Kucherena walked Snowden out of the airport. "We agreed that he would give me a
call and I will continue to consult him," the lawyer said.

Snowden left the airport together with WikiLeaks staffer and legal advisor Sarah
Harrison who has accompanied him during his 39 day stay in the transit zone and
continues to do so. She has remained with Mr Snowden at all times to protect his
safety and security, including during his exit from Hong Kong. "They departed
from the airport together in a taxi and are headed to a secure, confidential
place," WikiLeaks said in a statement.

"Despite the ongoing pressure from the United States, which has been trying to
interfere with this sovereign process in violation of the U.N. Protocol on the
Rights of Refugees, Russia has done the right thing and granted Mr Snowden
temporary asylum. The certificate of temporary asylum by the Russian Federation
lasts for one year and affords Mr Snowden the right to live in and travel around
Russia, where he can now plan his next steps in safety," WikiLeaks said in a
statement.

On receiving his asylum certificate Snowden said, as quoted by WikiLeaks: "Over
the past eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no respect for
international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning. I thank the
Russian Federation for granting me asylum in accordance with its laws and
international obligations."

WikiLeaks commended Russia for accepting Snowden's request and supporting him
when many countries felt so compromised by U.S. threats that they could not.

Over twenty asylum requests to various countries were made to try to secure Mr
Snowden's passage. Throughout this period the United States took irregular and
disproportionate actions to block Snowden's right to seek asylum in violation of
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2312 (1967), which states that "the
grant of asylum. . . is a peaceful and humanitarian act and... as such, it
cannot be regarded as unfriendly by any other State."

WikiLeaks said the United States is no longer a safe place for whistleblowers
and national security journalists and urged that the U.S. government amends its
ways, reverse this trend and re-establish its moral authority.

"President Barack Obama while elected on a platform promising to protect
whistleblowers, has now prosecuted more national security whistleblowers than
all other presidents in United States history combined. This bellicose response
from the US administration makes it clear that Snowden could not receive a fair
trial.

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange said: "This is another victory in the fight
against Obama's war on whistleblowers. This battle has been won, but the war
continues. The United States can no longer continue the surveillance of world
citizens and its digital colonisation of sovereign nations."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              52 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

Snowden leaves airport after Russia grants asylum

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 1050 words


MOSCOW (AP) National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden left the transit zone
of a Moscow airport and officially entered Russia after authorities granted him
asylum for a year, his lawyer said Thursday, a move that suggests the Kremlin
isn"t shying away from further conflict with the United States.

Snowden"s whereabouts will be kept a secret for security reasons, lawyer Anatoly
Kucherena said, making it even harder to keep track of the former NSA systems
analyst, who has been largely hiding out at Moscow"s Sheremetyevo airport since
his arrival from Hong Kong on June 23.

The U.S. has demanded that Russia send Snowden home to face prosecution for
espionage over his leaks that revealed wide U.S. Internet surveillance
practices, but Russian President Vladimir Putin dismissed the request. In a
statement released by WikiLeaks, Snowden thanked Russia and lashed out at the
Obama administration.

"Over the past eight weeks we have seen the Obama administration show no respect
for international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning," he said.
"I thank the Russian Federation for granting me asylum in accordance with its
laws and international obligations."

The move already appears to have further strained tense U.S.-Russian relations
amid differences over Syria, U.S. criticism of Russia"s human rights record and
other disputes. Putin has said his asylum was contingent on him not hurting U.S.
interests, but the Kremlin could have interpreted that to exclude documents he
had already leaked to newspapers that continue to trickle out.

The White House insisted Snowden isn"t a whistleblower or dissident, saying the
move to grant him asylum undermines Russia"s record of cooperation with the U.S.
Spokesman Jay Carney said that the White House is re-evaluating whether a
planned fall summit with President Barack Obama and Putin should still go ahead.

In his application for asylum, Snowden said he feared he could face torture or
capital punishment if he is returned to the U.S., though the U.S. has promised
Russia that is not the case. The U.S. has revoked his passport, and the
logistics of him reaching other countries that have offered him asylum,
including Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia, are complicated.

"He now is one of the most sought-after men in the world," Kucherena told
reporters at the airport. "The issue of security is very important for him."

The Guardian newspaper on Wednesday published a new report on U.S.
intelligence-gathering based on information from Snowden, but Kucherena said the
material was provided before Snowden promised to stop leaking as a requirement
of getting asylum.

The one-year asylum can be extended indefinitely, and Snowden also has the right
to seek Russian citizenship. According to the rules set by the Russian
government, a person who has temporary asylum would lose it if he travels
abroad.

Kucherena said it would be up to Snowden to decide whether to travel to any
foreign destination, but added that "he now has no such plans."

Snowden"s father said in remarks broadcast Wednesday on Russian television that
he would like to visit his son. Kucherena said he is arranging the trip.

WikiLeaks, which has adopted Snowden"s cause, said in its statement that legal
adviser Sarah Harrison has been with him in the transit zone for 39 days and
remains with him. It said only that they left the airport in a taxi and that
they are heading to a "secure, confidential place."

The group also praised Russia for providing him shelter.

"We would like to thank the Russian people and all those others who have helped
to protect Mr. Snowden," WikiLeaks said on Twitter. "We have won the battle now
the war."

Kucherena said that Snowden spent little time packing. The lawyer said the
fugitive had friends in Russia, including some Americans, who could help ensure
his security, but wouldn"t elaborate.

"He has got friends, including on Russian territory, American friends, who would
be able to ensure his safety for the time being," Kucherena said.

He refused to say whether Snowden would stay in Moscow or move to stay elsewhere
in Russia, saying the fugitive would discuss the issue with his family.

Kucherena argued that Russia did the right thing by offering shelter to Snowden
despite U.S. pressure. "Russia has fulfilled a humanitarian mission with regard
to the U.S. citizen who has found himself in a difficult situation," he said,
voicing hope that the U.S. wouldn"t try to slam Russia with sanctions.

Putin"s foreign affairs aide, Yuri Ushakov, sought Thursday to downplay the
impact on relations between the two countries.

"This issue isn"t significant enough to have an impact on political relations,"
he said in remarks carried by Russian news agencies.

But Sen. Robert Menendez, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
said in a statement that the Russian decision to grant asylum to Snowden would
hurt ties.

"Edward Snowden is a fugitive who belongs in a United States courtroom, not a
free man deserving of asylum in Russia," the Democratic lawmaker said.

Lyudmila Alexeyeva, a veteran of Russia"s human rights movement and head of the
respected Moscow Helsinki Group, welcomed the news on asylum for Snowden, but
added that his quest for freedom of information has landed him in a country that
has little respect for that and other freedoms.

"Having fought for the freedom and rights, Snowden has ended up in a country
that cracks down on them," Alexeyeva said, according to the Interfax news
agency.

Rachel Denber of Human Rights Watch sounded a similar note. "He cannot but be
aware of the unprecedented crackdown on human rights that the government has
unleashed in the past 15 months," Denber said in an e-mailed comment.

Putin has launched a wide-ranging crackdown on dissent since his inauguration
for a third presidential term in May 2012, with the Kremlin-controlled
Parliament stamping a series of laws that introduced heavy fines for
participants in unsanctioned protests and imposed tough restrictions on
non-government organizations.

A law passed in June imposes hefty fines for providing information about the gay
community to minors or holding gay pride rallies, a move that has prompted gays
in the U.S. and elsewhere to call for a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics in
Sochi.

___

Laura Mills contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              53 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

Timeline: Edward Snowden"s Journey

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 660 words


LONDON (AP) National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden has been granted
temporary asylum in Russian soil, ending weeks of limbo. This is how the story
developed:

__

May 20: Edward Snowden, 29, arrives in Hong Kong, just after taking leave from
his National Security Agency contracting firm Booz Allen Hamilton.

June 5: A British newspaper, the Guardian, reports that the NSA is collecting
the telephone records of millions of American customers of Verizon under a
secret court order. Security experts say the records of other phone companies
are also involved. Subsequent stories by the Guardian and The Washington post
contain further surveillance revelations.

June 9: Snowden, who claims to have worked at the National Security Agency and
the CIA, allows himself to be identified as the source of disclosures about the
secret U.S. surveillance programs. Snowden tells the Guardian his "sole motive
is to inform the public as to that which is done in their name and that which is
done against them."

June 10: Snowden checks out of his Hong Kong hotel, new whereabouts unknown. A
day later, Booz Allen Hamilton says it has fired Snowden "for violations of the
firm"s code of ethics and firm policy."

June 12: The South China Morning Post in Hong Kong says it interviewed Snowden
at a secret location. "I am not here to hide from justice. I am here to reveal
criminality," it quoted Snowden as saying.

June 14: British government issues worldwide alert to airlines, urging them not
to allow Snowden aboard flights to the United Kingdom.

June 19: Iceland says a spokesman for secret-spilling organization WikiLeaks who
claims to represent Snowden has contacted to government officials about a
possible application for asylum.

June 22: Unsealed criminal complaint shows the U.S. government has charged
Snowden with espionage and theft, and the National Security Council says U.S.
officials have contacted authorities in Hong Kong for Snowden"s extradition.

June 23: Snowden leaves Hong Kong on an Aeroflot flight to Moscow.

June 24: Snowden has a seat booked on an Aeroflot flight bound for Cuba, but is
not seen on board. WikiLeaks officials say Snowden has applied for asylum in
Ecuador, Iceland and possibly other countries.

June 25: Russian President Vladimir Putin says Snowden is in the transit zone of
a Moscow airport and will not be extradited to the United States, adding that he
is free to go anywhere. Without a U.S. passport, Snowden is effectively
stranded. The White House says Russia has a "clear legal basis" to expel the
leaker.

June 27: President Barack Obama says he won"t engage in "wheeling, dealing and
trading" to get Snowden extradited to the U.S.

July 1: Putin says Snowden will have to stop leaking U.S. secrets if he wants
asylum in Russia which he says is something Snowden doesn"t want to do.

July 2: Wikileaks says Snowden is seeking asylum in 19 more countries, including
China, Cuba, Nicaragua, Venezuela and India.

July 3: A plane carrying Bolivian President Evo Morales was rerouted to Austria
after various European countries refused to let it cross their airspace because
of suspicions that Snowden was on board. European nations later apologize.

July 5: Wikileaks says Snowden has put in asylum applications to six new
countries, which it does not identify. The next day, the presidents of
Nicaragua, Venezuela and Bolivia say Snowden is welcome in their countries.

July 12: Snowden meets activists and Russian officials, says he is willing to
stop leaking secrets about U.S. surveillance programs if Russia will give him
asylum until he can move on to Latin America.

July 16: Snowden asks his lawyer to submit a request for temporary asylum in
Russia, claiming he faces persecution from the U.S. government and could face
torture or death.

July 26: U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder tells the Russian government that the
U.S. will not seek the death penalty for Snowden.

Aug. 1: Snowden leaves airport after Russia grants asylum for one year.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              54 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

Snowden granted asylum - by Russia

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 768 words


Fugitive US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden has stepped out of the Moscow
airport where he was marooned for more than five weeks, after Russia granted him
one year"s asylum to the fury of the United States.

Snowden slipped out of Moscow"s Sheremetyevo airport in a cloak-and-dagger
operation overseen by his Russian lawyer but unnoticed by the hordes of media
trying to follow his every move.

The White House said it was "extremely disappointed"that the former National
Security Agency (NSA) contractor was given asylum by Moscow and said it would
review the need for a US-Russia summit in September.

Snowden, 30, is wanted on felony charges by the United States after leaking
sensational details of vast US surveillance programmes, but Russia has refused
to extradite him.

The fugitive was whisked away in a taxi to an undisclosed location, leaving his
lawyer to reveal that he had received temporary asylum in Russia just two weeks
after making an application.

"Snowden has left Sheremetyevo airport. He has just been given a certificate
that he has been awarded temporary asylum in Russia for one year," lawyer
Anatoly Kucherena told AFP.

A spokeswoman for Sheremetyevo confirmed he had left the airport after 2:00 pm
(1000 GMT). A grainy still image broadcast by Rossiya 24 television showed a
young man with a rucksack _ apparently Snowden _ about to get into a car outside
the airport.

In a statement released by the WikiLeaks anti-secrecy website, Snowden thanked
Russia for giving him asylum and slammed the administration of US President
Barack Obama for having ``no respect"" for international or domestic law.

"But in the end the law is winning," Snowden said.

Kucherena, who had held several meetings with Snowden and helped him make his
asylum application on July 16, added his new place of residence would be kept
secret for security reasons.

"His location is not being made public for security reasons since he is the most
pursued man on the planet. He himself will decide where he will go," Kucherena
said, adding Snowden was now in a "safe place".

Interviewed by Rossiya 24 television, Kucherena held up a scanned copy of
Snowden"s asylum certificate. It was issued on July 31, valid until July 31 of
2014, and is complete with his fingerprint.

Kucherna said that Snowden would eventually emerge into public view and give
interviews to the press. But he said Snowden first required an "adaptation
course" after so long in the transit zone.

He added that Snowden would be helped in Russia by unspecified "American
friends"who would assist with the fugitive"s security.

Meanwhile, the founder of Russia"s most popular social network VKontakte _
28-year-old Pavel Durov _ offered a job to Snowden as a programmer.

Snowden has been staying in the transit zone of the Sheremetyevo airport north
of Moscow since he flew in from Hong Kong on June 23. Until now, he had never
formally crossed the Russian border.

Awarding Snowden asylum status in Russia came two days after US soldier Bradley
Manning was convicted of espionage for leaking US secrets to WikiLeaks.

WikiLeaks, which has supported Snowden, said on Twitter that Snowden was still
"under the care" of WikiLeaks British staffer Sarah Harrison who flew in with
him from Hong Kong and is believed to have been with him ever since.

"They departed from the airport together in a taxi and are headed to a secure,
confidential place," WikiLeaks said.

The White House warned that the decision could prompt Obama to cancel a planned
visit to Moscow in September for talks with President Vladimir Putin ahead of
the Saint Petersburg G20 summit.

"We"re extremely disappointed," White House spokesman Jay Carney told reporters.

"We"re evaluating the utility of a summit in light of this. This move by the
Russian government undermines a long-standing record of law enforcement
cooperation," he added.

Robert Menendez, chairman of the powerful US Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
described the asylum as a "setback" for US-Russia relations.

"Edward Snowden is a fugitive who belongs in a United States courtroom, not a
free man deserving of asylum in Russia," he said.

Putin"s foreign policy advisor Yury Ushakov rapidly sought to limit the
potential diplomatic damage, saying that the situation should not affect
relations with Washington.

"This situation is rather insignificant and should not influence political
relations between Russia and the US," Ushakov said.

The Russian strongman has so far made no comment. As the news of Snowden"s
flight from the airport broke, Putin was holding a meeting on military
cooperation with the visiting president of Tajikistan.

- AFP

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              55 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

BBC Monitoring quotes from China, Taiwan press 2 Aug 13

LENGTH: 1714 words


The following is a selection of quotes from editorials and commentaries carried
in 1-2 August 2013 website editions of mainland Chinese, Hong Kong and Taiwan
newspapers and news portals available to BBC Monitoring. Unless otherwise
stated, the quotes are in Chinese. The figure in brackets after the quote
indicates the date of publication on the website

Edward Snowden

Headline: "How long will Snowden embarrass the US?"

Beijing's Xinhua News Agency: www.xinhuanet.com "...Russian media reports quote
a Kremlin figure as saying that Russia does not think that Russia-US relations
will be seriously affected by the [US whistle-blower Edward] Snowden incident
and there is still no indication that US President Obama will cancel a scheduled
visit to Russia in September. But in fact, this statement itself is a sign that
Russia-US relations may be seriously affected... So far, the US has exhausted
its tricks, but there is still no outcome on the extradition of Snowden. It can
be described as suffering constant embarrassment in this drama. In contrast,
Russia is more than equal to the task... As long as Snowden is not 'brought to
justice', the Obama administration will have to endure more embarrassment." (Ren
Haijun, reporter, Beijing) (1)

Headline: "Snowden gains 'freedom', new harm added to Russia-US relations"

2. "...Russian President Putin has repeatedly said that Russia has no intention
of getting involved in the matter, stressing that 'Snowden came uninvited', and
that it 'should not affect Russia-US relations', hinting that this
whistle-blower should leave Russia. However, Snowden was 'unaware' and proposed
temporary asylum, which really made Moscow feel in a dilemma. Russia decided to
take the initiative after a rethink on this 'hot potato', which was somewhat
unexpected by the US... Now that Snowden has been allowed to enter Russia, the
US' 'fit of anger' will increase..." (Liu Yue, Liu Kai, reporters, Moscow) (1)

Headline: "Is Russia challenging the US by taking in Snowden?"

3. "...The US has been exerting pressure on Russia and calling for Snowden to be
handed over for alleged espionage, but this has remained 'verbal' and without
real action. In fact, the US has long recognized that calling on Russia to hand
over Snowden is unrealistic and that friction is inevitable. Now that Snowden
has been allowed to enter Russia, the possibility of the US arguing in 'a fit of
pique' with Russia and the rift between the two sides even deepening further
cannot be ruled out..." (Liu Kai, reporter, Moscow) (1)

Headline: "Snowden's asylum in Russia good for all parties"

Hong Kong's Wen Wei Po (Beijing-backed Hong Kong newspaper): paper.wenweipo.com
"...Snowden's asylum in Russia was an expected outcome for Snowden and the US
and Russia, but also an appropriate arrangement.... Snowden's fate has had an
outcome, but the US' global cyber-monitoring violated human rights on a massive
scale. The US still has to give a truthful explanation to all the countries and
regions whose networks and computers were infiltrated. The US must stop acts
that violate human rights in other countries and interfere in other countries'
affairs." (Editorial) (2)

Beijing's Jinghua Shibao (Beijing Times): www.jinghua.cn "...The advantage of
giving temporary asylum status to Snowden is that it can prevent direct
embarrassment between the Kremlin and the White House, while also satisfying
public opinion..." (Xu Lifan, commentator) (2)

Headline: "US crusade to hide the truth of spying"

Beijing's China Daily (state-run newspaper) in English: www.chinadaily.com.cn
"...What is ironic is that if [Bradley] Manning, Snowden and [Julian] Assange
were pursued by other governments, such as China and Russia, the White House and
Foggy Bottom would be applauding them and calling them not just whistle-blowers,
but heroes and fighters for human rights... The US' harsh stance toward the
three whistle-blowers is apparently intended to 'kill a chicken to warn monkeys'
to use a Chinese idiom. In this regard it has had the effect of putting pressure
on journalists, especially those covering the national security beat, and
potential whistle-blowers of US government's wrongdoings, to not delve too far
into the murky world of 'national security'..." (Chen Weihua, deputy editor,
China Daily USA) (2)

Japan deputy prime minister

Headline: "Japan has no right to frequently break bottom line"

Beijing's Renmin Ribao (People's Daily, Chinese Communist Party newspaper):
paper.people.com.cn/rmrb "Recently, Japan's Deputy Prime Minister Taro Aso
publically advocated following the approach of Nazi Germany in promoting the
constitutional amendment process. As a political figure with an important
position in the Japanese government, Taro Aso's remarks are a trampling of the
rights of Japanese nationals, but also a blatant denial of the outcome of the
victory of the war against fascism and a provocation of the post-war
international order. Regardless of whether Taro Aso personally retracts these
words or not, its impact on human justice and conscience is difficult to rescind
and people's vigilance towards a right-tilting Japan will not diminish..."
("Zhong Sheng") (2)

Headline: "Aso retracts Nazi remarks"

Beijing's China Daily (state-run newspaper) in English: www.chinadaily.com.cn
"...Aso prefers a quiet revision [of Japan's post-war constitution], and
[Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo] Abe may want extensive debates before revision,
but the Japanese people and members of the international community who
understand the risks oppose it." (Interview with Yang Bojiang, researcher,
Institute of Japanese Studies, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (government
think-tank)) (2)

China-Japan territorial seas dispute

Headline: "Maritime power key to China's future"

Beijing's Global Times in English: www.globaltimes.cn "...On Thursday [1
August], Japan's Liberal Democratic Party asked the Japanese government to
counter China's gas exploration in the East China Sea. China will not accept
Japan's unreasonable request, but this does bring China trouble... China will
not accept Japan's unreasonable request, but this does bring China trouble...
China's maritime competitiveness needs to overwhelm Japan's. By then, Tokyo will
be nowhere near as provocative as it is today..." (Editorial) (2)

Headline: "Abe targets energy projects"

2. "China's exploration of oil and gas resources in waters under its
jurisdiction is totally legal as the area is an extension of Chinese continental
shelf... Japan's demands are groundless." (Interview with Lu Yaodong,
researcher, Institute of Japanese Studies, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
(government think-tank)) (2)

Democracy debate

Headline: "China will only be worse than the Soviet Union if in turmoil"

Beijing's Xinhua News Agency: www.xinhuanet.com "Angels, opinion leaders and
public intellectuals have been fabricating rumours and fabricating negative news
on society every day on microblogs to create an apocalyptic scene of China's
imminent collapse, denigrate the existing socialist system and propagate a model
of European- and US-style capitalist constitutionalism. They have constantly
fanned public hatred towards the current political regime... If China takes the
same path as the Soviet Union, but without as many resources, what will ordinary
Chinese eat?.. The reality of China's per capita resources has determined that
China's tragedy will be many times greater than Russia's..." (Signed article by
Wang Xiaoshi) (1)

Hong Kong newspaper South China Morning Post on 2 August notes that the Xinhua
article, which was signed "Wang Xiaoshi", appears to have originated on 15 July
with a post on a personal blog registered to someone by the same name.

Beijing's Huanqiu Shibao (Global Times): www.huanqiu.com "...The inflow of
Western political thought has changed China. But in this process, we keep
discovering that the reality of China is like a big mountain, which is often
insurmountable for the West's experience and doctrines. So far today, China's
development has reached a certain level, and it is increasingly difficult for
Western doctrine to provide an accurate interpretation, let alone guide us. Our
independent thinking and innovation is growing in urgency... We must not
underestimate ourselves and be fooled by the West. The power of Western
discourse does not mean that they really hold the truth." (Editorial) (2)

Headline: "Liberalism, ideological trend that only leads to greater chaos"

2. "...The growth of liberalism in China is uneven, and only a handful of
liberal intellectuals advocate turning it into a political choice and using
liberalism to 'reform China'. But such a political proposal has not read the air
[taken into account the prevailing social mood] and it cannot work in China.
Liberalism has spread most widely among the middle class, and they are the true
social foundation for liberalism in China. But liberalism in the middle class is
more of a concept of life and a desire for social reform, and they harbour
vigilance against calls to change the world politically. They do not want China
to become another Egypt. China cannot be messed up, and it cannot turn worse
because of political radical attempts... It is no longer possible for China to
reject liberalism, but a small number of people want to dig it into a 'pit' for
China and use it to 'topple' China..." (Editorial) (1)

Online rumours

Six of China's biggest internet service providers, including Sina Weibo, Sohu
and Baidu, have launched a joint internet platform for debunking "online
rumours" and "false information".

Headline: "Anti-rumour online platform positive first step"

Beijing's Global Times in English: www.globaltimes.cn "...Over the past few
years, we have been bewildered and misled by many rumours spread online, but
fortunately the situation is likely to improve in the future. Beijing launched
its first joint anti-rumour online platform Thursday [1 August]... This is a
laudable step. Rumours can impose severe side effects on the social regulation.
They can cause widespread panic, disturb the order of society and damage the
government's credibility... Strengthening the responsibilities of Internet
companies and encouraging them to assume bigger responsibilities is the right
approach..." (Commentary) (2)

Sources: As listed

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              56 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       August 2, 2013 Friday 8:15 AM GMT

White House threatens summit withdrawal as Russia grants Edward Snowden asylum;

The White House has threatened to pull out of a summit with Vladimir Putin in
retaliation for Russia's decision to grant asylum to Edward Snowden, the
fugitive whistleblower.

BYLINE: Tom Balmforth in Moscow and Jon Swaine in New York

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 974 words


Spokesman Jay Carney said the Obama administration was "evaluating the utility"
of a scheduled summit with Mr Putin in Moscow next month in advance of a G20
meeting in St Petersburg.

"We are extremely disappointed that the Russian government would take this step
despite our very clear and lawful requests in public and private that Mr.
Snowden be expelled and returned to the United States," said Mr Carney.

Senator Chuck Schumer, a New York Democrat, declared: "Russia's stabbed us in
the back, and every day that Snowden is allowed to be free they twist the knife
further. Now that Snowden has been set free, I don't think the G-20 should be
meeting in Russia and I think we should not participate if they do."

Moscow granted Mr Snowden one year's temporary asylum in Russia, ending nearly
five weeks of limbo in a Moscow airport and infuriating the White House.

Mr Snowden's asylum papers as shown to the press by his lawyer

In a statement carried by Wikileaks after weeks of silence, Mr Snowden thanked
the Russian authorities for offering him temporary asylum and accused Mr Obama
of showing "no respect for international or domestic law" in their bid to have
him returned to the United States to face trial and a probable lengthy sentence.

After leaking details of secret US and British mass online surveillance
programs, the 30-year old former National Security Agency contractor was charged
with espionage and theft of government property.

Wikileaks said the United States had made onward travel from Russia "impossible"
despite for Mr Snowden filing 20 appeals for asylum to various countries. It
accused Mr Obama of having "now prosecuted more national security whistleblowers
than all other presidents in United States history combined."

Mr Snowden's whereabouts are now unknown. Speaking to state Russian television,
Snowden's lawyer Anatoly Kucherena said that his client left the airport to an
undisclosed location, adding only that it is "secure."

He eluded hoards of journalists who have staked out the airport since he flew
from Hong Kong to Sheremetyevo Airport in June.

State television aired a photograph of "No. 0011330" temporary asylum document
valid until 31 July 2014 and inset with a recent photograph of Snowden.

Anatoly Kucherena, the Russian lawyer assisting the 30-year-old American in his
asylum bid, said he had passed his client documents from Russian migration
services.

Mr Kucherena, who has ties to the FSB security services, said Mr Snowden had
been transferred to an undisclosed location which will be kept secret for
security reasons.

"He now is one of the most sought after men in the world," Kucherena told
reporters at the airport. "The issue of security is very important for him."

Russian media said Mr Snowden crossed onto Russian territory at reportedly 15.30
Moscow time (12.30 BST). An airport representative confirmed the departure to
the Reuters news agency.

Mr Snowden's next move is uncertain. Facing a trial and lengthy sentence at
home, he has been offered permanent asylum in Venezuela but faces significant
logistical hurdles getting there. Moscow has refused American requests to hand
him over, but neither does it not want to shelter him forever.

President Vladimr Putin had said that the fugitive could receive asylum in
Russia on condition he stops leaking US secrets. Mr Kucherena has said Snowden
accepted the condition.

According to guidelines on the Federal Migration Service website, temporary
asylum can be extended for year-long stints endlessly.

Lon Snowden, the NSA leaker's father, yesterday claimed the FBI had asked him to
fly to Moscow and try to persuade his son to return to the US to face espionage
charges,  with Russian state television saying Mr Snoweden plans to visit Russia
in the near future.

The news came hours before President Barack Obama was due to welcome a group of
Democrat and Republican politicians to the White House to discuss their concerns
about the National Security Agency's mass surveillance programs, exposed by Mr
Snowden.

Photographs aired on state media appeared to show a man who looks like Snowden
leaving the airport in a plain silver car accompanied by a young woman - thought
to be Wikileaks' Sarah Harrison. Standing by were his lawyer as well as several
others who could be part of a security detail. The driver was wore a black
T-shirt and a baseball cap.

State television aired a photograph of "No. 0011330" temporary asylum document
inset with a recent photograph of Snowden. The document are valid until 31 July
2014. According to guidelines on the Federal Migration Service website,
temporary asylum can be extended for year-long stints repeatedly.

The Russian Federal Migration Service can deliberate over temporary asylum
requests for up to three months, suggesting that Mr Snowden's case -- processed
in little over a fortnight -- may have received priority treatment.

Yuri Ushakov, a high placed Kremlin advisor reportedly expressed hope that the
move would not "affect the character of relations." But the decision to grant
Snowden asylum - almost certainly taken ultimately by President Vladimir Putin -
looks likely to strain Russia's relations with the United States, with
Washington threatening to potentially boycott the G20 Summit in Moscow in
September.

The Kremlin has refused to extradite Mr Snowden because it does not have an
extradition treaty with its former Cold War foe, although it has said that Mr
Snowden must stop leaking US intelligence if he wishes to stay on Russia
territory.

Polls show that almost a half of Russians wanted Mr Snowden granted asylum.

In an interview with Russian state television, Lon Snowden, the NSA leaker's
father, said he plans to visit Russia in the near future and thanked President
Putin for granting his son asylum.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              57 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

Fugitive granted asylum warned of 'rights' in Russia;
Snowden has new home but warned to expect no 'noble' treatment

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 686 words


Edward Snowden has left diplomatic limbo land. But the freedom the fugitive
American whistleblower is seeking may be difficult to find in his temporary home
in Russia.

After squatting in the transit area of a Moscow airport for more than five
weeks, Snowden was granted a one-year asylum on Thursday, ratcheting up tensions
between Russia and the U.S., which has charged him with espionage.

He reportedly slipped away in a taxi to the home of some American expats,
calling Russia's offer a victory for the rule of law. "Over the past eight weeks
we have seen the Obama administration show no respect for international or
domestic law, but in the end the law is winning," he said in a statement
released by WikiLeaks.

Snowden's presence in Russia has sparked excitement among some young Russians.
Before his asylum request was granted, he was offered a marriage proposal by the
glamorous former spy known as Anna Chapman. And he has had a stream of job
offers - the first from the popular Russian social networking site VK.

His lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, said he intends to work, and has received letters
from eager companies and individuals.

Snowden has agreed not to publish any more leaks that damage the U.S., as Putin
requested.

But Moscow liberal opposition leader Ilya Yashin, who was arrested in a
political protest, warned that Snowden "should not be expecting Russian special
intelligence services to show any noble behaviour toward him."

"He should not expect that they will be treating him as some kind of fighter for
liberties and human rights."

In Washington, White House spokesman Jay Carney said President Barack Obama was
"extremely disappointed" by Russia's decision to harbour Snowden, and that the
administration was reconsidering "the utility of having a summit."

Snowden, a former U.S. spy agency contractor, exposed the extent of America's
electronic spying and now tops Washington's most wanted list. Fleeing to Hong
Kong, then Moscow, he has become an international hero and villain.

Snowden had little choice of asylum. A handful of South American countries
offered refuge, but U.S. allies were under pressure to close their air space to
any plane that carried him. Nor was Putin - himself a former KGB spy - initially
eager to extend hospitality to a leaker of state secrets.

That, for Snowden, might be an alarm bell. Although human rights advocates
welcome his exit from the airport, they warn he is far from home free in a
country that has little respect for freedom of expression and other rights.
"Edward Snowden should be allowed to get asylum wherever he thinks he can be
safe," said Rachel Denber, Human Rights Watch's deputy director for Europe and
Central Asia. "His rights should be respected."

But she warned, "Russia is in the midst of the most intense, fierce crackdown on
human rights since the end of the Soviet era. It's across the board, on a whole
range of civil and political rights."

Last month Putin signed a draconian law that stigmatizes gay people and bans
giving any information about homosexuality to children as gay "propaganda."
Foreigners attending the 2014 Sochi Olympics will also be under the ban.

The Russian parliament has passed a slate of other laws that appeal to
conservative, religious and anti-Western constituents. They include laws that
restrict freedom of assembly and expression, crack down on foreign funding of
NGOs, give greater protection against libel for public officials, and expand
definitions of treason.

Russian-Canadian activist Pyotr Verzilov -- the husband of imprisoned Pussy Riot
member Nadezhda Tolokonnikova - said that Snowden should maintain "reasonable
judgment" about Russia's human rights, and "be careful and cautious with Russian
authorities even if they provide him with refuge."

Snowden is in "an impossible position because his narrative of transparency is
completely at odds with Putin's police state.," said William Browder, head of
Hermitage Capital Management, which campaigned for U.S. sanctions against
Russian officials suspected in the death of alleged tax fraud whistleblower
Sergei Magnitsky.

With files from Star news services

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Fugitive and former U.S. spy agency contractor Edward Snowden's new
Russian refugee document. Snowden secured temporary asylum in Russia on
Thursday, ending more than a month in limbo in a Moscow airport's transit area.
MAXIM SHEMETOV/REUTERS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                 Copyright 2013 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited


                              58 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 2, 2013 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Snowden leaves Moscow airport

BYLINE: Isabel Gorst;Joby Warrick

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1077 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - Russia's decision to grant temporary asylum to Edward Snowden opened a
fresh wound in Moscow's battered relations with the United States, even as it
ended the bizarre two-month odyssey that began when the former National Security
Agency contractor leaked details of top-secret U.S. surveillance operations.

Snowden slipped away in a taxi on Thursday from the Moscow airport that had been
his home since June 23, bearing a Russian refugee certificate granting him
permission to stay in the country for one year. It was a forceful rebuff to a
series of private and public appeals by U.S. officials to have Snowden returned
to the United States, where he faces espionage charges.

Obama administration officials denounced the decision to protect Snowden and
hinted of repercussions, perhaps including the cancellation of a planned summit
between President Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin. Reaction from
Congress was far harsher, with key lawmakers from both sides calling for a
fundamental rethinking of relations with Moscow.

"Russia has stabbed us in the back," said Sen. Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y). "Each
day that Mr. Snowden is allowed to roam free is another twist of the knife."

For Snowden, 30, the asylum decision was a reprieve from extradition and the
prospect of a trial in the United States. But his refugee status opens the
possibility of direct meetings between him and U.S. officials to discuss the
treatment he could face if he returned home voluntarily.

The former technical contractor and admitted leaker of NSA documents has
signaled that he intends to stay. One of his attorneys said Snowden has
discussed taking language classes and perhaps finding work in Russia, a country
that has a history of harshly repressing its government critics as well as a
record of mistreating other U.S. citizens who have sought asylum there.

Indeed, one of the few bright spots for U.S. officials was that Snowden's
behavior - including his ability to release additional secrets - is certain to
be tightly controlled by his new hosts, in contrast with the freedoms he may
have had in one of the Latin American countries that offered him asylum, former
U.S. officials and Russia experts said.

"He will likely live under very restricted conditions with a lot of
surveillance," said Andrew Kuchins, director of the Russian and Eurasia Program
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank.
"If he steps out of line, Putin will crush him like a bug."

The day's developments began with an announcement by Anatoly Kucherena, an
attorney for Snowden, that Russian authorities had granted a request for
temporary refugee status. The approval allows the former Maryland resident to
live and work in Russia while his application for permanent political asylum is
considered. Until Thursday, Snowden had been in limbo in the transit area of
Moscow's sprawling Sheremetyevo International Airport, with his exact
whereabouts known only to his attorneys and a handful of Russian officials.

Kucherena told the state broadcaster Russia 24 that Snowden got in an airport
taxi "for a secure location" about 3:30 p.m. local time, eluding reporters who
have camped at the airport since he arrived June 23 on a flight from Hong Kong.
The lawyer described Snowden as "the most wanted man on the planet" and said he
needed "time to adapt to Russian realities."

Snowden issued a brief statement through the anti-secrecy organization
WikiLeaks, which has provided him with legal and logistical support since he
identified himself as the person behind a series of news leaks about the NSA's
widespread and highly secretive surveillance efforts.

"Over the past eight weeks, we have seen the Obama administration show no
respect for international or domestic law, but in the end the law is winning,"
Snowden was quoted as saying. "I thank the Russian Federation for granting me
asylum in accordance with its laws and international obligations."

In Washington, the reaction from the White House was severe. In a news briefing
dominated by questions about Snowden, press secretary Jay Carney said the
administration is "extremely disappointed that the Russian government would take
this step" despite "ample legal justification" for returning Snowden to the
United States.

"This move by the Russian government undermines a long-standing record of law
enforcement cooperation" that had "recently been on the upswing" since the
Boston Marathon bombings in April, he said.

Carney insisted that Snowden "is not a dissident," or a whistleblower, but a
suspect in a criminal case with serious national security implications. He noted
that Snowden "has been . . . in possession of classified information in China
and in Russia," which is "both a huge risk and a violation" of U.S. law.

Asked whether Obama would attend the September summit in Moscow, Carney said,
"Obviously this is not a positive development . . . and we are evaluating the
utility of the summit."

Across town, there was a blistering response on Capitol Hill and calls for
retaliatory measures certain to infuriate the Kremlin. Sen. John McCain
(R-Ariz.), long one of the Senate's leading critics of Moscow, blasted the
asylum decision as "a slap in the face of all Americans" and called on the
administration to turn up the pressure on Moscow on a variety of fronts,
including a renewed push for NATO expansion and new missile-defense programs in
Europe.

"Now is the time to fundamentally rethink our relationship with Putin's Russia,"
McCain said in a statement released by his office. "We need to deal with the
Russia that is, not the Russia we might wish for. We cannot allow today's action
by Putin to stand without serious repercussions."

Russian officials sought to play down the asylum issue. Yuri Ushakov, a Kremlin
official, told reporters Thursday that the "relatively insignificant case" of
Snowden would not harm relations between Russia and the United States. In
comments before the White House news conference, he said he saw no sign that
Obama would cancel his planned trip to Moscow in September.

While Snowden was making his way to his new secret quarters, his father was
reportedly planning to travel to Russia to meet with him.

"I am so thankful to the Russian nation and President Vladimir Putin," Lon
Snowden told Russian television.

joby.warrick@washpost.com

Warrick reported from Washington. William Branigin, Jerry Markon and Julie Tate
in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              61 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                      August 1, 2013 Thursday 4:03 PM GMT

NSA fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden leaves Moscow airport after government
grants him asylum in Russia;
An airport spokeswoman confirmed that he had left the building in the last two
hours

BYLINE: Rob Williams

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 288 words


The fugitive former US spy agency contractor Edward Snowden has left Moscow's
Sheremetyevo airport after the Russian government granted him refugee status.

Reports from the Interfax news agency quoted Snowden's Russian lawyer, Anatoly
Kucherena, saying: "I have just handed him the documents from the Russian
Federal Migration Service. They allow him to leave the airport."

"Snowden has left Sheremetyevo airport. He has just been given a certificate
that he has been awarded temporary asylum in Russia for one year."

Anatoly Kucherena said that that Mr Snowden's whereabouts will be kept secret
for security reasons.

"I have just seen him off. He has left for a secure location," Anatoly Kucherena
told state broadcaster Russia 24. "Security is a very serious matter for him."

An airport spokeswoman confirmed that he had left the building in the last two
hours.

The anti-secrecy organisation WikiLeaks, which is also assisting Snowden,
confirmed on Twitter: "Edward Snowden has successfully acquired refugee status
in Russia,"

Snowden, 30, arrived in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23.

He had hoped to fly to Latin America, where three countries have offered to
shelter him, but was concerned that the United States would prevent him reaching
his destination.

Snowden's case has caused new strains in relations between Russia and the United
States which wants him extradited to face espionage charges.

The US has demanded that Russia send him home to face prosecution for espionage,
but President Vladimir Putin has dismissed the request.

Mr Putin had said that Mr Snowden could receive asylum in Russia on condition he
stops leaking US secrets. Mr Kucherena has said Mr Snowden accepted the
condition.

Additional reporting by Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              67 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            August 1, 2013 Thursday

Snowden has left the airport - reports

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 316 words


NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has received documents from the Federal
Migration Service allowing him to leave Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, where he
has been holed up in the transit zone since June 23.

Snowden has left the airport and gone to an undisclosed location, Russia's
Rossia 24 reported on Thursday. It cited Anatoly Kucherena, the Russian lawyer
helping Snowden obtain asylum, as saying that the fugitive's whereabouts would
not be revealed in order to protect him.

'According to our information, he has already left the territory of the
airport,' RIA Novosti quoted an airport representative as saying on Thursday.

According to Rossiya 24, Snowden has been granted temporary asylum by the
Federal Migration Service.

Edward Snowden, a former contractor for the National Security Agency, leaked a
secret court order to the media in early June revealing that Verizon was
required to provide data from millions of customers to U.S. authorities. He also
revealed that the PRISM surveillance program allowed the NSA and the FBI to tap
into nine U.S. Internet companies and gather information about users, including
emails and web searches.

Snowden arrived in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23 and asked 21 countries,
including Russia and Venezuela, for asylum. With the help of lawyer Anatoly
Kucherena, Snowden filed a formal request for temporary asylum in Russia with
the Federal Migration Service on July 16. Once granted temporary asylum, Snowden
would be able to remain in Russia for up to one year.

Since then, however, Snowden had said that he would like to remain in Russia
permanently, according to televised comments made by Kucherena on the Rossia 24
channel.

Snowden is wanted by the United States on charges that include espionage, and
could face up to 30 years in prison if convicted. The U.S. government has
pressured several countries, including Russia, not to give Snowden asylum.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              68 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                      August 1, 2013 Thursday 5:53 PM GMT

Edward Snowden is given one year's asylum - and offered a job on 'Russia's
Facebook'

SECTION: HOME

LENGTH: 366 words


Fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden has been offered a job by Russia's top
social networking site, hours after receiving a year-long asylum in the country.

The American, wanted in the US for leaking secrets about its electronic
surveillance programmes, stepped out of Sheremetyevo airport at about 2pm local
time after weeks in legal limbo.

Shortly afterwards VKontakte, Russia's answer to Facebook, issued a statement
saying: "We invite Edward Snowden to St Petersburg and will be happy if he
decides to join the star team of programmers at VKontakte."

Snowden's  Russian lawyer Anatoly Kucherena confirmed Russia had allowed Snowden
refugee status for one year, saying: "I have just handed him the documents from
the Russian Federal Migration Service. They allow him to leave the airport. I
have just seen him off. He has left for a secure location. Security is a very
serious matter for him."

Kucherena said Snowden's temporary asylum papers will allow him to work.

Wikileaks tweeted: "Edward Snowden has successfully acquired refugee status in
Russia."

Mr Snowden, 30, arrived in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23. He had hoped to fly
to Latin America, where three countries have offered to shelter him, but was
concerned the US would prevent him getting there.

His case has caused new strains in relations between Russia and America, which
wants him extradited to face espionage charges.

Mr Snowden now faces living under strict curbs imposed by the Russian security
agencies. His movements will initially be curtailed. Vladimir Volokh,  head of
the public council of the Federal Migration Service, said: "He will only be
allowed to stay in places designated by law enforcement agencies."

President Vladimir Putin has denied his intelligence services are seeking
secrets known to the former US National Security Agency contractor. Mr Snowden
has indicated he hopes to reach South America, with offers of shelter from
Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua. But this week his lawyer said he might apply
for Russian citizenship.

US Attorney General Eric Holder has given Moscow an assurance Mr Snowden will
not face the death penalty if extradited to America. But Russia says it does not
intend to hand him over.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              69 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                      August 1, 2013 Thursday 2:09 PM GMT

Edward Snowden 'granted asylum in Russia' as he leaves Moscow airport

BYLINE: Staff/Agency

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 257 words


National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden has been granted asylum in Russia
for one year and left the transit zone of Moscow airport, his lawyer says.

Anatoly Kucherena said he handed over the papers to Mr Snowden today and the
fugitive then left Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport where he was stuck since his
arrival from Hong Kong on June 23.

Mr Snowden's whereabouts will be kept secret for security reasons, he said.

The US has demanded that Russia send him home to face prosecution for espionage,
but President Vladimir Putin has dismissed the request.

Mr Putin had said that Mr Snowden could receive asylum in Russia on condition he
stops leaking US secrets. Mr Kucherena has said Mr Snowden accepted the
condition.

The Guardian newspaper yesterday published a new report on US
intelligence-gathering based on information from Mr Snowden, but Mr Kucherena
said the material was provided before he promised to stop leaking.

Mr Snowden, who revealed details of a US intelligence programme to monitor
internet activity, has received offers of asylum from Venezuela, Nicaragua and
Bolivia and said he would like to visit those countries. However, the logistics
of reaching any of those countries are complicated because his US passport has
been revoked.

The Snowden case has further strained US-Russian ties already tense amid
differences over Syria, US criticism of Russia's human rights record and other
issues.

Mr Snowden's father has said on Russian television that he would like to visit
his son and Mr Kucherena said he is arranging the trip.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              74 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            July 31, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden's father, Lon, to come to Russia

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 470 words


NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden's father, Lon, said he is planning a visit to
Moscow, where his son has been stuck in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport
since June 23.

Lon Snowden told the Rossiya 24 TV channel that he would not discuss the issue
with the FBI, but go of his own accord.

The comments came after apparent attempts by the FBI to get Lon Snowden to go to
Moscow and persuade his son to return to the United States collapsed.

'I said, 'I want to be able to speak with my son. .&thinsp;.&thinsp;. Can you
set up communications?' And it was, 'Well, we're not sure,'' Lon Snowden was
quoted by the Washington Post as saying in an interview published on Wednesday.
'I said, 'Wait a minute, folks, I'm not going to sit on the tarmac to be an
emotional tool for you.''

Lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, who helped Edward Snowden apply for temporary asylum
in Russia, said he would send an official invitation to Lon Snowden as early as
Wednesday.

'The dates [of the trip] haven't been determined. But we will decide very soon.
I'm going to try to send the invitation today,' he told Vesti FM on Wednesday.
Kucherena added that he hoped the Federal Migration Service would come to a
preliminary decision on Edward Snowden's asylum request before Lon Snowden's
visit. A preliminary decision would allow Edward Snowden to leave the transit
zone.

In the emotional interview that Lon Snowden gave Russia's Rossiya 24 channel, he
thanked Russian authorities.

'I'd also like to thank President Vladimir Putin for what I believe is the
courage and the strength to keep my son safe,' he said. 'Ed, I hope you're
watching, your family is well and we love you, we hope you're healthy, we hope
you're well. I hope to see you soon, but most of all I want you to be safe. I
want you to find safe haven.'

Lon Snowden told the Washington Post that he had initially cooperated with U.S.
authorities about his son and told them everything he could remember. But the
talks apparently turned sour, and Lon Snowden condemned U.S. lawmakers for
calling his son a traitor.

Edward Snowden, a former contractor for the National Security Agency, leaked a
secret court order to the media in early June revealing that Verizon was
required to provide data from millions of customers to U.S. authorities. He also
revealed that the PRISM surveillance program allowed the NSA and the FBI to tap
into nine U.S. Internet companies and gather information about users, including
emails and web searches.

He is wanted by the United States on charges that include espionage, and could
face up to 30 years in prison if convicted. The U.S. government has pressured
several countries, including Russia, not to give Snowden asylum.

Earlier, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder told the Russian government that the
U.S. would not torture or seek the death penalty for Snowden.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              75 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            July 31, 2013 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

Snowden's father offers firm defense of his son

BYLINE: Jerry Markon

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1064 words


The FBI tried to enlist the father of National Security Agency leaker Edward
Snowden to fly to Moscow to try to persuade his son to return to the United
States, but the effort collapsed when agents could not establish a way for the
two to speak once he arrived, Snowden's father said Tuesday.

"I said, 'I want to be able to speak with my son. . . . Can you set up
communications?' And it was, 'Well, we're not sure,' " Lon Snowden told The
Washington Post. "I said, 'Wait a minute, folks, I'm not going to sit on the
tarmac to be an emotional tool for you.' "

In a wide-ranging interview, the elder Snowden offered a vehement defense of the
young man some have labeled a traitor. He said that Edward, who is holed up at
an airport in Moscow, grew up in a patriotic family in suburban Maryland, filled
with federal agents and police officers, and that he "loves this nation.''

Asked what triggered his son's decision to leak top-secret intelligence
documents, Snowden, a retired Coast Guard officer, said he didn't know. Although
Edward had seemed troubled in April during their final dinner together, he said
his son had recently put up a "firewall between himself and his family."

"We had no idea what was coming,'' he said.

But he pointed to a possible explanation: what he considers misleading
statements by U.S. officials about the surveillance methods that Edward Snowden
revealed. "If you could say there was a tipping point, I would say it was what
happened in the last six to nine months of this nation," the elder Snowden said.

He also mentioned a conversation that hinted at his son's growing political
awareness; he said Edward told him that he was "troubled" by the 2010 suicide of
a Tunisian street vendor that helped trigger the Arab Spring protests.

"It was the idea that a man who simply wanted to make a living, who sold fruits
and vegetables to support himself and his family, felt so suppressed and
humiliated by his government that he would set himself on fire," Lon Snowden
said.

The younger Snowden, 30, has remained a figure of intrigue since he revealed his
identity last month as the principal source behind articles in the British
newspaper the Guardian and The Post about secret surveillance. Under the
programs he exposed, the NSA collects the telephone records of millions of
Americans from U.S. telecommunications companies and the online communications
of foreign targets from major Internet firms.

Snowden, who has been charged in the United States with theft and espionage, is
seeking asylum in Russia. U.S. officials have condemned the leaks and said the
programs he exposed are legal and supervised by a federal court.

In the elder Snowden's first newspaper interview, conducted with his attorney,
Bruce Fein, he offered insight into his son, whose own girlfriend  labeled him a
"man of mystery.'' Snowden, who is divorced from Edward's mother, said his son
was "a gentle child" who was highly intelligent and fascinated by computers and
technology but didn't always do well in school.

Yet he grew animated when asked why Edward left Arundel High School halfway
through the 10th grade. "If people are going to call him a high school dropout,
they should call him a 16-year-old college drop-in as well,'' he said,
explaining that Edward missed months of school because he contracted
mononucleosis and made up the coursework at a community college.

He added that his son, a voracious reader, once smiled at him, quoted Mark Twain
and said, "Dad, my education is interfering with my learning.' ''

Snowden said he was unsurprised that the adult Edward later made the remarkable
leap from security guard at a federally funded center at the University of
Maryland to the intelligence world. "I'm assuming that what they saw was a
23-year-old brilliant man. Someone saw something in him," said Snowden, 52.

But Snowden said he was shocked when his son was identified as the leaker.

"I was as surprised as the rest of America. I was stunned," he said. He said he
saw no direct signs of the growing disillusionment with the government and its
surveillance methods that Edward has spoken about in interviews. "He simply did
not talk about his work. He was true to the culture,'' Snowden said.

Edward has said he took his final government contracting job with Booz Allen
Hamilton in Hawaii to gain access to sensitive NSA information. But his father
said Edward told him that his previous contracting job had been eliminated
because of the federal budget sequestration.

"As a father, it pains me what he did,'' Snowden said. "I wish my son could have
simply sat in Hawaii and taken the big paycheck, lived with his beautiful
girlfriend and enjoyed paradise. But as an American citizen, I am absolutely
thankful for what he did.''

Less than two days after Edward's unmasking, FBI agents showed up at his
father's home outside Allentown, Pa., where he retired from the Coast Guard in
2009. He spoke to them for four hours, telling them "everything I could possibly
think of'' and sharing e-mails he had exchanged with Edward, he said.

Soon after that, the FBI asked him to fly to Moscow.

It is not precisely clear why the negotiations over the trip failed, and FBI
officials declined to comment. Nor is it clear why Lon Snowden has not gone to
Moscow on his own.

"Sure, I could get on a flight tomorrow to Russia. I'm not sure if I could get
access to Edward,'' said Snowden, who said he had communicated with his son
through unspecified "intermediaries" as recently as two days ago.

What is clear is that relations between Lon Snowden and U.S. officials have
since deteriorated. He condemned the Obama administration and members of
Congress for labeling his son a traitor and said he now prefers that Edward stay
in Russia.

"If he comes back to the United States, he is going to be treated horribly. He
is going to be thrown into a hole. He is not going to be allowed to speak,"
Snowden said.

At one point, he nearly choked up as he discussed a plaque that used to be on
his desk at the Coast Guard headquarters in the District. Quoting the poet Ralph
Waldo Emerson, it said: "Nothing is at last sacred but the integrity of your own
mind."

The father said that applied to the son, who played with the plaque as a child.
"I believe he is comfortable with who he is,'' Lon Snowden said. "Yes, I am
certain. I know my son. He knows he has done the right thing."

jerry.markon@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              78 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                       July 27, 2013 Saturday 5:20 AM GMT

United States: We won't execute or torture Edward Snowden if he is extradited

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 525 words


Edward Snowden will not be executed or tortured if he is extradited home from
Russia, according to the United States Attorney General.

The 30-year-old former US spy agency contractor is facing charges of illegally
disclosing government secrets.

He has been stuck in the transit area of a Moscow airport for more than a month
despite Washington's calls to hand him over.

Russia has refused to extradite Snowden, who leaked details of a secret US
surveillance programme including phone and Internet data, and is now considering
his request for a temporary asylum.

In a letter dated Tuesday 23 July and released on Friday, US Attorney General
Eric Holder wrote: "Mr Snowden has filed papers seeking temporary asylum in
Russia on the grounds that if he were returned to the United States, he would be
tortured and would face the death penalty. These claims are entirely without
merit."

He added: "Torture is unlawful in the United States. If he returns to the United
States, Mr Snowden would promptly be brought before a civilian court."

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Russia's FSB and its US counterpart, the
FBI, were in talks over Snowden's fate.

A US Senate panel voted unanimously on Thursday to seek trade or other sanctions
against Russia or any other country that offers asylum to Snowden.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had expressed "strong determination" not to let
relations suffer over the dispute "no matter how the situation develops".

But he has reiterated Moscow's stance that Russia "did not hand over, does not
hand over and will not hand over anybody".

Putin, a former KGB spy, has said Snowden could only be granted sanctuary in
Russia if he stopped actions that could harm the United States.

A Russian security expert said the talks may be about how to secure assurances
he will not leak further information if he were granted sanctuary in Russia.

"The United States maybe understands that they are not going to get Snowden, so
my theory is that they are trying to save face and stop Snowden from publishing
new exposes," Andrei Soldatov said, adding that he was sceptical this could be
done.

Russia's federal migration service has up to three months to consider Snowden's
temporary asylum request filed on 16 July.

Snowden's supporters have worried he could face the same fate as Private First
Class Bradley Manning, the US soldier on trial for providing documents to
WikiLeaks. Manning was placed in solitary confinement for up to 23 hours a day
with guards checking on him every few minutes.

Snowden has been offered asylum by three Latin American countries but none of
them is reachable directly on commercial flights from Moscow, where he flew in
from Hong Kong on 23 June. He has also had his passport revoked by the United
States.

Bruce Fein, an attornery for Snowden's father Lonnie, said he had not yet
received a response from Holder to a letter he sent to the attorney general
suggesting developing "parameters for a fair trial" for Edward Snowden.

The US House of Representatives on Wednesday narrowly rejected a plan to limit
the National Security Agency's ability to collect electronic information,
including phone call records.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2013 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              79 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday

Snowden would not face death penalty, Russia told: US attorney general seeks to
stop granting of asylum Whistleblower not yet given temporary permit

BYLINE: Adam Gabbatt in New York

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 589 words


The US has told the Russian government that it will not seek the death penalty
for Edward Snowden should he be tried in America, in an attempt to prevent
Moscow from granting asylum to the former National Security Agency contractor.

In a letter sent this week, the US attorney general, Eric Holder, told his
Russian counterpart that the charges Snowden faces do not carry the death
penalty. He said the US "would not seek the death penalty even if Mr Snowden
were charged with additional, death-penalty-eligible crimes".

Holder said he sent the letter, addressed to Alexander Konovalov, Russia's
minister of justice, in response to reports that Snowden had applied for
temporary asylum in Russia "on the grounds that if he were returned to the
United States, he would be tortured and would face the death penalty".

"These claims are entirely without merit," Holder said. In addition to his
assurance that Snowden would not face capital punishment, the attorney general
wrote: "Torture is unlawful in the United States."

"We believe that these assurances eliminate these asserted grounds for Mr
Snowden's claim that he should be treated as a refugee or granted asylum,
temporary or otherwise," said Holder.

The US has been seeking Snowden's extradition to face felony charges for leaking
details of NSA surveillance programmes. There were reports this week that
authorities in Moscow had granted Snowden permission to stay in Russia
temporarily, but when Snowden's lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, arrived to meet his
client at Sheremetyevo airport, he said the papers were not yet ready.

Kucherena, who has close links to the Kremlin, said Snowden would remain in the
airport's transit zone, where he has been staying since arriving from Hong Kong
on 23 June, for the near future.

The letter from Holder, and the apparent glitch in Snowden's asylum application,
suggest that Snowden's fate is far from secure.

But a spokesman for President Vladimir Putin insisted Russia has not budged from
its refusal to extradite Snowden. Asked by a reporter whether the government's
position had changed, Dmitry Peskov said: "Russia has never extradited anyone
and never will." Putin has previously insisted Russia will not extradite Snowden
to the US. There is no US-Russia extradition treaty.

That still leaves the Russian authorities room for manoeuvre, however, as
Snowden is not technically on Russian soil and so would not need to be
extradited.

Peskov said that Putin is not involved in reviewing Snowden's application or
involved in discussions about the whistleblower's future with the US, though he
said the Russian security service, the FSB, had been in touch with the FBI.

There is support among some Russian politicians for Snowden to be allowed to
stay. The speaker of the Russian parliament, Sergei Naryshkin, has said that
Snowden should be granted asylum to protect him from the death penalty.

The letter from Holder was designed to allay those fears and negate the grounds
for which Snowden has allegedly applied for asylum in Russia. The attorney
general said that if Snowden returned he would "promptly be brought before a
civilian court" and would receive "all the protections that United States law
provides".

"Any questioning of Mr Snowden could be conducted only with his consent: his
participation would be entirely voluntary, and his legal counsel would be
present should he wish it," Holder said.

He added that despite Snowden's passport being revoked he "remains a US citizen"
and said the US would facilitate a direct return to the country.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              80 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday

Snowden to be spared death row, Russia told

BYLINE: MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT and STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

ABSTRACT

A letter to Russia from the U.S. attorney general also offered reassurances that
the United States would not torture Edward J. Snowden, a former intelligence
contractor who is seeking temporary asylum there.

FULL TEXT

Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said in a letter sent to the Russian
minister of justice this week that the United States would not seek the death
penalty against Edward J. Snowden, and would issue him a passport immediately so
he could travel back to the United States.

The letter also offered reassurances that the United States would not torture
Mr. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor who faces criminal charges of
disclosing classified information and has been hiding in an airport in Moscow in
order to evade the U.S. authorities.

''We believe these assurances eliminate these asserted grounds for Mr. Snowden's
claim that he should be treated as a refugee or granted asylum, temporary or
otherwise,'' Mr. Holder said in the letter to Justice Minister Aleksandr V.
Konovalov.

A copy of the letter was provided to The New York Times on Friday by a Justice
Department official, in response to questions about communications between the
U.S. and Russian governments about Mr. Snowden's fate.

The charges Mr. Snowden faces in the United States do not carry the death
penalty, the letter said, adding that the United States would not seek the death
penalty ''even if Mr. Snowden were charged with additional death
penalty-eligible crimes.''

Mr. Holder said that Mr. Snowden's claims that he was unable to travel are false
and that the United States was willing to issue him a special passport so he
could return.

''Despite the revocation of his passport on June 22, 2013, Mr. Snowden remains a
U.S. citizen,'' Mr. Holder said. ''He is eligible for a limited validity
passport good for direct return to the United States.The United States is
willing to immediately issue such a passport to Mr. Snowden.''

The Kremlin spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, restated Russia's refusal to extradite
Mr. Snowden, citing the lack of an extradition treaty between the two countries.
''We have never surrendered anyone,'' he said in a statement reported by the
Interfax news agency, ''and we will never do so in the future.''

At the same time, there have been indications that the administration's warning
that President Barack Obama could cancel a planned meeting with President
Vladimir V. Putin in September if Mr. Snowden remained in Russia might be
complicating the issue. A decision on allowing Mr. Snowden into Russia while
officials consider his request for temporary political asylum, expected this
week, now appears likely to be weeks away, according to officials.

Mr. Peskov also said that Mr. Putin was resolved to avoid a deterioration in
relations with the United States and that he remained in contact with ''his
American counterparts.''''You can see by the president's schedule that he has
not given it up for the sake of keeping an eye on Snowden,'' Mr. Peskov was
quoted as saying.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              81 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

U.S. says it won't torture Snowden;
The NSA leaker need not fear abuse or the death penalty upon return, Russia is
told.

BYLINE: Marina Villeneuve, Carol J. Williams

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON


In an effort to break the international standoff over fugitive Edward Snowden,
the Obama administration has assured Russian authorities that the American on
the lam after revealing top-secret U.S. intelligence operations won't face the
death penalty or torture if he returns to the United States.

Atty. Gen. Eric H. Holder Jr. wrote to his Russian counterpart to say that
Snowden's claim to need political asylum in Russia for fear of abuse or
execution if returned to the United States was "entirely without merit," the
Justice Department disclosed Friday.

Holder told Russian Justice Minister Alexander Konovalov that the former private
contractor for the National Security Agency would be accorded the protections of
U.S. law, including the right to an attorney and to a public trial by jury.

"The Russians didn't really seek this assurance, but we didn't want them to take
Snowden's claims on these issues at face value and use them as an excuse to
grant him asylum, when he should be returned to the U.S. to face justice," said
a U.S. official who was familiar with the drafting of the letter but was not
authorized to speak publicly about it.

After Snowden fled to Hong Kong from his home and workplace in Honolulu, he
leaked to British and U.S. news media details of massive NSA surveillance
operations that gather data on millions of citizens' private phone calls, emails
and Internet use. The leaks were made public in early June, and he was soon
fired by Booz Allen Hamilton from his $122,000-a-year job, charged with three
felony counts of espionage and theft. U.S. officials revoked his passport on
June 22.

Snowden showed up at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport a day after his
travel document was canceled and has been unable to proceed through passport
control or buy airline tickets.

Snowden's lawyer said Russia's Federal Migration Service was prepared to give
the fugitive permission to enter Russian territory and wait there for a formal
response to his petition for political asylum. Snowden wrote in a handwritten
appeal that he feared he'd be tortured during interrogation and possibly
sentenced to death if he returned to face prosecution in the U.S.

"The charges he faces do not carry that possibility, and the United States would
not seek the death penalty even if Mr. Snowden were charged with additional,
death penalty-eligible crimes," Holder wrote in the letter to Konovalov dated
Tuesday, the day the migration service reprieve was reported, then delayed.
"Second, Mr. Snowden will not be tortured. Torture is unlawful in the United
States."

Holder also said the U.S. government was prepared to provide Snowden with a
"limited validity passport" that would allow him to return to the U.S.

Holder's letter didn't specifically ask that Snowden be extradited. But Kremlin
spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters Friday that Russia would not send him
back to the United States against his will, the Interfax news agency reported.

President Vladimir Putin said this month that Snowden was welcome to stay in
Russia, but only if he ceased making disclosures that were detrimental to "our
American partners."

--

marina.villeneuve@latimes.com

carol.williams@latimes.com

Villeneuve reported from Washington and Williams from Los Angeles. Times staff
writer Christi Parsons contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              83 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday

US says won"t seek death penalty for Snowden

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 542 words


WASHINGTON (AP) Attorney General Eric Holder has told the Russian government
that the U.S. will not seek the death penalty for former National Security
Agency systems analyst Edward Snowden.

In a letter dated July 23, the attorney general said the criminal charges
Snowden faces do not carry the death penalty and that the U.S. will not seek the
death penalty even if Snowden were charged with additional death
penalty-eligible crimes.

Holder says his letter follows news reports that Snowden, who leaked information
on largely secret electronic surveillance programs, has filed papers seeking
temporary asylum in Russia on grounds that if he were returned to the United
States, he would be tortured and would face the death penalty.

The attorney general"s letter was sent to Alexander Vladimirovich Konovalov, the
Russian minister of justice.

Holder"s letter is part of an ongoing campaign by the U.S. government to get
Snowden back.

The attorney general"s letter may allay reported Russian concerns about how
Snowden might be treated if he is deported to the U.S.

Some Russian politicians, including parliament speaker Sergei Naryshkin, have
said Snowden should be granted asylum to protect him from the death penalty.

If Snowden were to go to a country that opposes the death penalty, providing
assurances that the U.S. won"t seek the death penalty may remove at least one
obstacle to his return to the U.S.

"I can report that the United States is prepared to provide to the Russian
government the following assurances regarding the treatment Mr. Snowden would
face upon return to the United States," Holder wrote. "First, the United States
would not seek the death penalty for Mr. Snowden should he return to the United
States." In addition, "Mr. Snowden will not be tortured. Torture is unlawful in
the United States," Holder"s letter said.

The attorney general said that if Snowden returned to the U.S. he would promptly
be brought before a civilian court and would receive "all the protections that
United States law provides."

Holder also said that "we understand from press reports and prior conversations
between our governments that Mr. Snowden believes that he is unable to travel
out of Russia and must therefore take steps to legalize his status. That is not
accurate; he is able to travel."

Despite the revocation of Snowden"s passport on June 22, Snowden remains a U.S.
citizen and is eligible for a limited validity passport good for direct return
to the United States, said the attorney general.

A spokesman for President Vladimir Putin said Russia has not budged from its
refusal to extradite Snowden.

Snowden, who is believed to have been staying at the Moscow airport transit zone
since June 23, applied for temporary asylum in Russia last week. The United
States wants him sent home to face prosecution for espionage.

Asked by a reporter whether the government"s position had changed, Dmitry Peskov
told Russian news agencies that "Russia has never extradited anyone and never
will." There is no U.S.-Russia extradition treaty.

Peskov also said that Putin is not involved in reviewing Snowden"s application
or discussions of the ex-NSA contractor"s future with the U.S., though the
Russian Security Service, the FSB, had been in touch with the FBI.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              84 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                       July 27, 2013 Saturday 3:43 AM GMT

Snowden 'won't face death penalty'

SECTION: PA NEWS FEEDS

LENGTH: 299 words


The United States has no plans to seek the death penalty for former National
Security Agency systems analyst Edward Snowden, attorney general Eric Holder has
assured the Russian government.

Mr Holder said the criminal charges Snowden now faces in America do not carry
the death penalty and the US will not seek his execution even if he is charged
with additional serious crimes.

The reassurance, in a letter dated Tuesday, followed reports that Snowden, who
leaked details of top secret US surveillance programmes, had filed papers
seeking temporary asylum in Russia on grounds that if he were returned to the US
he would be tortured and would face the death penalty.

Snowden has been charged with three offences in the US, including espionage, and
could face up to 30 years in prison if convicted.

The attorney general's letter was sent to Alexander Vladimirovich Konovalov, the
Russian minister of justice.

When Mr Snowden arrived at Moscow's international airport a month ago, he was
believed to be planning simply to transfer to a flight to Cuba and then to
Venezuela to seek asylum. But the US cancelled his passport, leaving him
stranded.

Besides applying for temporary asylum in Russia, Snowden has said he would like
to visit the countries that offered him permanent asylum - Venezuela, Bolivia
and Nicaragua.

Some Russian politicians, including parliament speaker Sergei Naryshkin, have
said Snowden should be granted asylum to protect him from the death penalty.

Bruce Fein, a lawyer representing Snowden's father, criticised Mr Holder.

He said: "Today the attorney general stated - apparently thinking he was being
conciliatory - that if Edward Snowden were returned to the United States we
wouldn't kill him or torture him. Those are concessions only in the mind of
someone who's very biased."

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              85 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 27, 2013 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. won't seek death penalty for Snowden, Holder says

BYLINE: Sari Horwitz;Michael Birnbaum

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 689 words


Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. has told a Russian official that the United
States will not seek the death penalty for Edward Snowden, the former National
Security Agency contractor who released classified documents to reporters about
U.S. surveillance and who has been holed up at a Moscow airport.

In a bid to prevent Snowden from being granted asylum by Russia, Holder wrote a
letter to the Russian justice minister, saying that although Snowden has been
charged with theft and espionage, he will not face the death penalty if returned
to the United States.

"The charges he faces do not carry that possibility, and the United States would
not seek the death penalty even if Mr. Snowden were charged with additional
death penalty-eligible crimes," Holder wrote to Justice Minister Alexander
Vladimirovich Konovalov.

The letter was dated Tuesday and released by the Justice Department on Friday.

Holder also told Konovalov that Snowden would not be tortured if he returns to
the United States and would be tried in a civilian rather than a military court,
with the full protection of U.S. law. Snowden has suggested in news reports that
he could be tortured or face the death penalty if returned home.

"Torture is unlawful in the United States," Holder wrote. "If he returns to the
United States, Mr. Snowden would promptly be brought before a civilian court
convened under Article III of the United States Constitution and supervised by a
United States District Judge. . . . Mr. Snowden would be appointed (or if so
chose, could retain) counsel."

The release of Holder's letter came on a day when Russian officials seemed both
unenthusiastic to have Snowden on their soil and unwilling to extradite him to
the United States.

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Russia "never surrendered anyone and we
will never do so in the future," the Interfax news agency reported.

At the same time, he said Russian President Vladimir Putin does not want the
Snowden drama to harm U.S.-Russian relations. Putin "has demonstrated strong
resolve to prevent this," Peskov said.

Snowden has been in a transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23. Vladimir Volokh, the head of the public
council of the Russian Federal Migration Service, said Friday that he could be
stuck there "for up to six months" as officials review his legal situation,
Interfax reported.

"The procedures to determine his legal status are underway. We know that he is
Edward Snowden only from his words. The passport he had has been canceled,"
Volokh said, according to Interfax.

"He is under protection in the transit area for his safety," Volokh said. "He is
an individual being pursued and his life is in danger."

In his letter, Holder said Snowden is free to travel from Moscow, despite the
revocation of his U.S. passport June 22. Snowden is immediately eligible for a
"limited validity passport" good for direct return to the United States, Holder
said.

"We understand from press reports and prior conversations between our
governments that Mr. Snowden believes he is unable to travel out of Russia,"
Holder wrote. "That is not accurate; he is able to travel."

Holder said U.S. officials think "these assurances eliminate these asserted
grounds for Mr. Snowden's claim that he should be treated as a refugee or
granted asylum, temporary or otherwise."

Snowden has previously said that he applied for asylum with countries other than
Russia, but his options have been limited because of fears that he could be
detained by the United States or its allies on the way to his destination.

On Friday, Snowden's father, Lon, urged President Obama in a letter to order
Holder to drop the charges against his son.

"We also find reprehensible your administration's Espionage Act prosecution of
Edward for disclosures indistinguishable from those which routinely find their
way into the public domain via your high level appointees for partisan political
advantage,'' the elder Snowden wrote, along with his attorney, Bruce Fein.

sari.horwitz@washpost.commichael.birnbaum@washpost.com

Birnbaum reported from Berlin. Jerry Markon contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              87 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                              July 26, 2013 Friday

Snowden"s remaining docs unlikely to tie US hands

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 1013 words


WASHINGTON (AP) It"s the stuff of spy novels: The hunted-down protagonist wins
in the end because he"s got damaging documents squirreled away, a bargaining
chip against the bureaucrats who want to silence him.

If National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden thinks he"s living in such a
thriller, legal experts say he"s got another thing coming. Nothing he has is
likely to scare off American prosecutors.

Snowden, stuck at a Russian airport while he seeks asylum from several
countries, has not overtly threatened the U.S. that he would release more
damaging documents. But the journalist through whom he has been working, Glenn
Greenwald, has said that blueprints that detail how the NSA operates will be
made public if something should happen to Snowden.

"This is his insurance policy," said Greenwald, a columnist with Britain"s
Guardian newspaper who received Snowden"s initial leaks and who communicates
with the former NSA systems analyst. In a July 13 article in the Argentine
newspaper La Nacion, Greenwald said, "The U.S. government should be on its knees
praying every day that nothing happens to Snowden, because if something does
happen, all the information would be revealed and this would be its worst
nightmare."

Snowden leaked details of two top secret U.S. surveillance programs. He has been
charged with three offenses, including espionage, and could face up to 30 years
in prison if convicted. Russian President Vladimir Putin has said that if
Snowden releases any more of the materials, Russia will not grant him temporary
asylum.

"If the Obama administration responds with an even harsher hand against me, they
can be assured that they"ll soon find themselves facing an equally harsh public
response," Snowden said in a June 17 online question-and-answer forum.

"Snowden has information enough to cause more damage to the U.S. government in a
single minute than any other person has ever had in the history of the United
States," Greenwald said in the article in La Nacion.

The U.S. Justice Department is not discussing its prosecution strategy. But
while the U.S. isn"t eager for any more classified information to be disclosed,
there"s little chance Snowden will be able to use what he has as a bargaining
chip to negotiate his prosecution or extradition. That"s because giving into
threats would risk opening the door for others to take similar action in the
future.

The government must take the position: "We don"t negotiate with extortionists,"
said Michael Chertoff, the former head of the Justice Department"s criminal
division and former secretary of homeland security. Chertoff said he can"t
recall a case in which the U.S. government has caved under this type of threat.

"I"m betting that there is virtually nothing that Snowden could do or threaten
to persuade the (U.S. government) not to prosecute," said Peter Zeidenberg, a
former federal prosecutor who was on the team that prosecuted I. Lewis "Scooter"
Libby, the Bush administration official who revealed the name of a CIA officer.
Zeidenberg said doing so would send a damaging message from the U.S.: "If you
are going to steal secrets, get the crown jewels; that way, the government will
never dare to prosecute."

Mark Zaid, an attorney who has represented people charged with espionage, said
these threats from Snowden and Greenwald are a form of graymail, a tactic in
which defendants charged with spying try to force the government to drop the
charges by threatening to expose U.S. secrets on the witness stand.

Zaid said every time Snowden releases more documents it could create additional
criminal charges. Zaid is not working on Snowden"s defense and hasn"t been
contacted by the leaker. But if he were representing Snowden, Zaid said, "I"d
tell him to shut up" and accept a marriage proposal from Russian spy Anna
Chapman. On July 3, the attractive redhead who was swept up with nine other
sleeper agents and deported from the U.S. in 2010 tweeted, "Snowden, will you
marry me?"

"The only thing really he"s got now is either minimize the penalties going
forward or work out some favorable resolution he"s comfortable with somewhere in
the world," Zaid said of Snowden.

And even then, it would be difficult for the U.S. government to negotiate, he
said.

"Because it"s not just about Snowden anymore," Zaid said. "It"s about anyone who
would follow in his footsteps."

Graymail is a common defense tactic, and three decades ago a law was passed to
combat it. Attorneys say the law was meant to let judges sort out the classified
information behind closed doors and determine what the defense genuinely needs
to make public. If the judge concludes the defendant cannot get a fair trial
without spilling secrets, the government can decide whether to go forward or
drop the case.

But Snowden has yet to enter into court proceedings. The government is in the
process of trying to extradite him to face the charges.

U.S. officials have said what Snowden already released will harm national
security, though it"s too early to tell what damage has been done. The U.S.
intelligence community has a good idea of what other documents he has.

"I wouldn"t describe it as graymail," Chertoff said. "I would describe it as
blackmail."

As Chertoff sees it, Snowden"s message to the government is this: "If you do
anything that Snowden doesn"t like he"s going to try to hurt you by putting out
information that could be damaging."

"To me, that"s extortion," Chertoff said.

When Snowden arrived at Moscow"s international airport on June 23 he was
believed to be planning simply to transfer to a flight to Cuba and then to
Venezuela to seek asylum. But the U. S. canceled his passport, stranding him. He
hasn"t been seen in public since, although he met with human rights activists
and lawyers on June 12. He"s applied for temporary asylum in Russia and has said
he"d like to visit the countries that offered him permanent asylum Venezuela,
Bolivia and Nicaragua.

___

Associated Press writers Michael Warren in Buenos Aires and Pete Yost in
Washington and researcher Monika Mathur in Washington contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              88 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday
                              RACING FINAL EDITION

OK, BOOK HIM Snowden, stuck in airport, gets 'Crime & Punishment' gift

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With News Wire Services

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 397 words


EDWARD Snowden's life is becoming like a Dostoyevsky novel.

The fugitive leaker of U.S. national security intelligence had expected his
Russian lawyer Wednesday to bring him documents allowing him to finally leave a
Moscow airport.

Instead, the attorney showed up with a change of clothes for him, a pizza and a
copy of Fyodor Dostoevsky's "Crime and Punishment."

It's a long book - and it now seems that's exactly what Snowden needs.

Initial reports suggested Snowden, 30, would soon exit the international wing of
Sheremetyevo Airport, where he's been stranded since June 23. But Anatoly
Kucherena, the Russian lawyer helping Snowden in his quest for temporary asylum
in Russia, said the paperwork hadn't come through.

"It's a unique situation for Russia. Let's understand that," Kucherena said.
"There are no precedents, and no similar requests have ever been made."

Because of the extraordinary circumstances, Kucherena said he couldn't give an
estimate of when, or if, Snowden would be allowed to pass through immigration.

The former U.S. defense contractor is wanted by the U.S. on espionage charges
related to his leaks of top-secret National Security Agency documents. The U.S.
revoked his passport.

While Snowden waits for permission to set foot on Moscow soil, he can read
Dostoyevsky's legendary book about Raskolnikov, who tries to justify murder by
convincing himself he is not beholden to society's mores. Kucherena said the
book would resonate with Snowden.

"I think that Raskolnikov, who killed the old money lender . . . I think he
should read about that," Kucherena said. "I don't want to say that there is a
similarity of their worldviews, but still I think this is a world classic. And
he will be interested."

State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said Secretary of State Kerry called the
Russian Foreign Minister to reiterate "that Mr. Snowden needs to be returned to
the United States, where he will have a fair trial"

"Obviously any move that would allow Mr. Snowden to depart the airport would be
deeply disappointing," Psaki added.

Snowden's asylum application in Russia has strained relations between the two
nations.

Among the many documents leaked by Snowden were ones that revealed the National
Security Agency actively gathers data on essentially all phone calls in the U.S.
and has access to the servers of nine major Internet companies through a program
called Prism.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Edward Snowden likely will have to kill a lot of time at Moscow
airport, if gift of Dostoevsky's massive classic is a sign. Photo by The
Guardian

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


                              90 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Snowden's bid to leave airport zone hits a snag

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko, Carol J. Williams

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


Russian authorities offered a teasing glimpse of liberation for U.S. fugitive
Edward Snowden on Wednesday when they said he could leave the diplomatic no
man's land of Moscow's main international airport and live in Russia while he
waits to hear about his request for temporary asylum.

No sooner had Russian news media reported that the American, who has no
passport, would be given papers to cross into Russia than his lawyer said
Snowden's attempt to clear passport control had been thwarted by "bureaucratic
difficulties." The Kremlin-allied attorney, Anatoly Kucherena, said Snowden
would have to stay in the airport transit zone for at least another day.

It wasn't immediately clear whether the last-minute complication was of the
variety that typically causes Russian border guards to reject documents because
of creases or smudged print, or a choreographed attempt to delay relief for
Snowden and keep him on edge. The delay also bought time for Russian officials
to reconsider whether granting Snowden entry while his asylum bid is weighed
would damage relations with Washington.

The former National Security Agency contractor arrived at Sheremetyevo
International Airport on June 23 on a flight from Hong Kong, reportedly en route
to a Latin American country that was considering giving him asylum. But because
U.S. authorities had revoked his passport, he was unable to enter Russian
territory, nor was he able to buy a ticket to fly elsewhere.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has said Snowden is welcome to stay in the
country as he seeks to evade U.S. criminal charges of espionage and theft in
connection with his absconding with sensitive NSA data files. But Putin has said
Snowden must refrain from further disclosures that could roil U.S.-Russian
relations.

Both the White House and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.), warned the Kremlin against giving Snowden "any
refuge" and demanded that he be handed over to U.S. authorities.

Kucherena met with Snowden on Wednesday afternoon to pass on the official papers
that were supposed to get him through immigration and out of the airport. He
told the mob of reporters awaiting the fugitive's emergence from the transit
zone that new complications had arisen.

"We ran today into some bureaucratic difficulties, but it is not a big deal as
everyone understands it is a unique case," Kucherena said in an interview with
The Times. He declined to go into detail about the problems but said they were
"nothing serious to worry about."

He said Snowden had to be fingerprinted and fill out a new form.

Snowden's main concern is his security as "he realizes full well that the safest
place for him right now is the transit zone," the lawyer said, alluding to the
possibility that Snowden could be snatched from the streets rendition-style and
spirited back to the U.S. under diplomatic cover.

The former government contractor plans to stay in the country for the time
being, the lawyer said, and is already learning the language and culture in hope
of getting a job while he waits to hear about his asylum request, a process that
usually takes about three months.

"In addition to some clothes, I brought him a book of stories by Anton Chekhov
and 'Crime and Punishment' by [Fyodor] Dostoyevsky," Kucherena said.

It was unclear where Snowden, 30, would stay once he leaves his airport limbo.
Several Russian human rights groups have pledged to help the man they admire as
a whistle-blower on excessive U.S. government surveillance.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

carol.williams@latimes.com

Times staff writers Loiko reported from Moscow and Williams from Los Angeles.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              91 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Snowden Gets Novel and Change of Clothes, but No Clearance to Exit Airport

BYLINE: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and STEVEN LEE MYERS; Andrew Roth and Noah
Sneider contributed reporting from Moscow, and Michael R. Gordon from
Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 730 words


MOSCOW -- After a month holed up in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport, Edward J. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor sought by the
United States on espionage charges, received a change of clothes and a copy of
''Crime and Punishment'' during a meeting with his lawyer on Wednesday, but
still no clearance to enter Russia.

Mr. Snowden has applied for temporary asylum in Russia, and Russian news
agencies had reported earlier on Wednesday that the Russian Federal Migration
Service had issued a certificate confirming his application and permitting him
to pass through Russian border control. A huge throng of reporters and camera
crews gathered at the airport terminal in anticipation of Mr. Snowden's
departure.

But around 6 p.m., Anatoly Kucherena, a Russian lawyer assisting Mr. Snowden
with his asylum request, emerged from the transit zone and said that the
certificate had not been received. He did not cite a reason for the delay but
said officials had informed him that Mr. Snowden's situation ''was not a
standard process'' and that the paperwork needed to allow him to depart the
airport required more time.

Mr. Kucherena said he had met with Mr. Snowden and described him as being in
good spirits, with plans to learn Russian. He said he had taken him the copy of
the Dostoyevsky book.

The Federal Migration Service declined to comment on the status of Mr. Snowden's
asylum request. He has been staying at the airport's international transit zone
since June 23, having flown here from Hong Kong one step ahead of an extradition
request from the United States.

While the bureaucratic process has unfolded slowly, Russian officials, including
President Vladimir V. Putin, have made clear that they have no intention of
extraditing him to the United States -- a position that has infuriated the Obama
administration.

Mr. Putin has insisted that Mr. Snowden's presence in Russia should not harm
relations between the two countries, even as the White House has signaled that
President Obama, amid mounting frustration, may cancel a planned summit meeting
in Moscow in September.

Secretary of State John Kerry called his Russian counterpart, Sergey V. Lavrov,
on Wednesday to discuss Mr. Snowden and reiterate the administration's assertion
that he should be returned to the United States for trial, said the State
Department's spokeswoman, Jen Psaki.

''Any move that would allow Mr. Snowden to depart the airport would be deeply
disappointing,'' Ms. Psaki said.

Russian officials this week issued statements noting that the United States has
routinely rejected extradition requests from the Russian government, apparently
to send a message that the Americans have no right to expect Mr. Snowden's
repatriation.

Mr. Kucherena, speaking to a crowd of reporters, said he had been trying to get
a determination from the migration service. ''Concerning today's situation, I
spent lots of time working on the question today, and currently the question is
not resolved,'' he said, adding, ''He is located here, and he is living here.''

''The situation is not standard for Russia,'' he said. ''There is lots of
bureaucracy to get through, the documents are still being looked over.''

He said that Mr. Snowden had been wearing the same clothes since arriving from
Hong Kong. The lawyer brought him new shirts and a fresh pair of jeans.

''He plans to study Russia's culture,'' Mr. Kucherena said. ''He wanted to see
Russia and what we talked about with him today, I gave him books. I gave him
Dostoyevsky, 'Crime and Punishment.' I thought it would be pleasant for him to
read about just who is Raskolnikov.'' He was referring to the protagonist in the
book, Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, who deals with mental anguish and moral
issues from killing a malicious pawnbroker.

In an interview with Rossiya 24 television earlier, Mr. Kucherena said he
thought Mr. Snowden would find the novel relevant to his own situation.

''I don't want to say that their internal conflicts are similar, but all the
same, I think it's a world classic and it will be interesting for him,'' the
lawyer said. He also told Rossiya 24 he would take Mr. Snowden works by Anton
Chekhov, a master of the modern short story.

''Chekhov is my favorite writer,'' he said. ''That's why I think it will be
interesting for him to see how Chekhov described our reality through people that
lived through that epoch.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/25/world/europe/snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Anatoly Kucherena, a lawyer for Edward J. Snowden, said
Wednesday that paperwork on his asylum request was delayed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAXIM
SHEMETOV/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday

Lawyer: Snowden to stay in Russia for now

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 474 words


MOSCOW (AP) Edward Snowden may be settling in for a long stay in Russia, his
lawyer indicated Wednesday, saying the National Security Agency leaker plans to
start studying the Russian language and culture and that, for the time being,
Russia is his final destination.

Anatoly Kucherena"s comments came after the lawyer met with Snowden in the
transit zone of Moscow"s Sheremetyevo international airport amid Russian news
reports that Snowden was about to receive documents that would allow him to
leave the airport where he"s apparently been marooned for more than a month.

Some Russian news agencies cited unidentified sources as saying Kucherena would
deliver the documents to Snowden, but the lawyer later said there was no such
paperwork. Snowden has applied for temporary asylum in Russia.

In a meeting with human rights activists two weeks ago, Snowden reportedly said
he eventually wanted to visit Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua, all of which
have offered him asylum. But Kucherena cast doubt on those intentions after
Wednesday"s meeting.

"Russia is his final destination for now. He doesn"t look further into the
future than that," Kucherena said on state television.

The lawyer said that Snowden is staying in the transit zone "for now" and
"intends to stay in Russia, study Russian culture."

The American applied for temporary asylum in Russia last week after his attempts
to leave the airport and fly out of Russia were thwarted. The United States
wants him sent home to face prosecution for espionage.

Snowden, who revealed details of the NSA"s wide-ranging spying activities
targeting data and phone communication, is believed to have been staying at the
transit zone of Moscow"s Sheremetyevo airport since June 23, when he arrived on
a flight from Hong Kong.

Kucherena told journalists that he has brought fresh clothes for Snowden along
with several books for the American to read, including one by Anton Chekhov and
Fyodor Dostoyevsky"s novel "Crime and Punishment."

The novel is about the mental anguish and moral dilemmas of a poor ex-student
who kills a pawnbroker for her cash, and Kucherena said Snowden might find it
interesting. But the lawyer told Rossiya-24: "I"m not implying he"s going
through a similar mental anguish."

President Vladimir Putin has said that Snowden can be granted asylum in Russia
only if he stops leaking NSA secrets.

A spokeswoman for Russia"s Federal Migration Service told The Associated Press
on Wednesday that it had no information about the status of Snowden"s
application for asylum.

Granting Snowden asylum would add new tensions to U.S.-Russian relations already
strained by Washington"s criticism of Russia"s pressure on opposition groups,
Moscow"s suspicion of U.S. missile-defense plans in Europe, and Russia"s
resistance to proposed sanctions against the regime of Syrian President Bashar
Assad.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              94 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Russia poised to let Snowden leave airport soon, official says

BYLINE: Isabel Gorst

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - After a month camped out in a transit area of Moscow's international
airport, fugitive Edward Snowden on Wednesday received clean clothing and a copy
of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's "Crime and Punishment" - but no final word that he would
be allowed into the country after having leaked U.S. surveillance secrets, his
lawyer said.

A Russian immigration official indicated Wednesday that his government would
soon give the former National Security Agency contractor a document enabling him
to leave Sheremetyevo Airport and stay in Russia temporarily, under tight
official constraints.

Nicaragua, Bolivia and Venezuela have offered to give Snowden refuge, but
pressure from Washington and concerns that the United States or Europe might
block him from traveling through their airspace have prevented the fugitive from
leaving Russia. Snowden's lawyer, Anatoly Kucherena, said Wednesday that his
client, who has been charged in the United States with leaking classified
information, has started to learn Russian and is preparing for an extended
sojourn in the country.

Vladimir Volokh, head of the public council of the Russian Federal Migration
Service, said Snowden would be handed a certificate stating that he had applied
for political asylum.

Snowden would "only be allowed to stay in places designated by Russian law
enforcement agencies," Volokh told the Ekho Moskvy radio station.

If Snowden's request for temporary asylum is granted, a process likely to take
at least three months, he would, in theory, have the freedom to get a job and
move around the country.

Kucherena visited the airport Wednesday and said he brought Snowden some
clothing because he has been wearing the same cotton shirt and pants for the
last month. Kucherena said he also brought writings by Dostoyevsky and Anton
Chekhov so that Snowden could familiarize himself with classic Russian
literature.

Snowden is "very grateful to Russia for not banishing him and not betraying
him," said Kucherena, who described his client as an "extraordinary" person.

"He is just waiting," the lawyer said. "He is trying to be brave."

Snowden has been stranded in a tedious diplomatic limbo at the airport - without
permission or documentation to officially enter Russia or travel to another
country - since flying there from Hong Kong on June 23. His constricted
circumstances are a bit like those of Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, who
is under investigation by the United States for disseminating leaked secrets and
who has been holed up inside the Ecuadoran Embassy in London since June 2012.

Snowden has admitted giving reporters voluminous information about secret
surveillance programs. He said he wanted to draw public attention to
data-gathering that he believes violates privacy rights.

Although reporters rushed to the airport Wednesday as Russian media began
reporting that Snowden had received the certificate he needed to leave,
Kucherena said the departure would not happen before Thursday and could be
later.

"He is staying in the transit zone in accordance with the existing regulations,"
Kucherena said. "He is acting precisely within the framework of the
regulations."

Snowden's situation "is unique for Russia, and we must understand that there
have never been such cases or applications before," the lawyer added. "There is
a certain procedure, and the Federal Migration Service is obliged to comply with
it."

Snowden asked the Russian government for temporary asylum last week, adding
another layer of complexity to U.S.-Russia relations, which are already strained
over differences on the civil war in Syria, international adoptions and other
issues.

President Vladimir Putin has said that, to be granted asylum, Snowden would have
to stop releasing information that could harm the United States. Snowden has
previously indicated that he sees life in Russia as a short-term solution and
hopes eventually to move to Latin America.

"We are seeking clarity from Russian authorities about Mr. Snowden's status and
any change in it," White House spokesman Jay Carney said Wednesday.

The Russian Foreign Ministry said on its Web site that Secretary of State John
F. Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke Wednesday about
"bilateral relations" and about preparations for a conference on a political
settlement in Syria.

foreign@washpost.com

Michael Birnbaum in Berlin contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              95 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden may leave Moscow airport transit zone today

LENGTH: 337 words


Text of report by corporate-owned Russian business channel RBK TV on 24 July

[Presenter] Edward Snowden may leave Sheremetyevo today after staying in the
transit zone of the Moscow airport for already one month and one day. Anatoliy
Kucherena, who has been helping the fugitive American to get political asylum in
Russia, has told the Izvestiya [daily] that it is on Wednesday, 24 July, that
the deadline expires for the FMS's [Federal Migration Service] consideration of
his request and that now the FMS is expected to give the former CIA contractor a
document allowing him to stay on Russian territory.

As to what Snowden will be doing here, Kucherena has told the RSN [Russian News
Service] agency that Snowden will work here.

It appears the former CIA contractor has decided to settle down in this country
and even to learn Russian. As of today Snowden does not want to leave Russia,
according to the lawyer.

Incidentally, it is known that Edward Snowden has already been officially
offered a job of expert on the UN and NATO at the Russian International
Institute of Strategic Studies, Vektor. The job offer has been posted on the
institute's website.

Anyway, it is our television channel that was the first to offer a job to
Snowden. Back three weeks ago, RBK TV General director Aleksandr Lyubimov wrote
on Twitter that he had offered the fugitive American the post of presenter of
the "Snowden - Investigation Technology" show which the latter could present
even from Sheremetyevo.

It is expected that the FMS will take a decision on whether to grant asylum to
Snowden within three months. At the same time, Kucherena is confident that the
decision will be positive. According to the defence lawyer, if the Russian
migration authorities refuse asylum to Snowden, the American is even prepared to
take them to court.

Earlier, Snowden said that he was considering Russia as a temporary refuge and
that he would like to live permanently in one of the Latin American countries.

Source: RBK TV, Moscow, in Russian 0400 gmt 24 Jul 13

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              97 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            July 24, 2013 Wednesday

U.S. pressure over Snowden is hypocritical, Russia says

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

In the latest in a series of statements that seem aimed at laying the groundwork
for granting asylum to Edward J. Snowden, Moscow said Washington routinely
disregards its extradition requests.

FULL TEXT

Russian officials have complained that the United States routinely disregards
extradition requests by the Russian government, the latest in a series of public
statements that seem aimed at laying the groundwork for granting asylum to
Edward J. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor on the run from American
authorities.

In separate but apparently coordinated statements, officials from the Russian
Interior Ministry and from the prosecutor general's office complained Monday
that the United States had refused to extradite individuals sought by Russia as
terrorism suspects or on serious criminal charges.

''The United States is repeatedly refusing Russia to extradite individuals, to
hold them criminally liable, including those accused of committing serious or
heinous crimes,'' Sergei Gorlenko, the acting chief of the prosecutor general's
extradition office, told the Interfax news agency. ''We have been denied the
extradition of murderers, bandits and bribe takers.''

The Interior Ministry accused the United States of ''double standards'' in
demanding Mr. Snowden's return. The prosecutor general's office said the United
States had refused to extradite about 20 suspects over the past decade, citing
the lack of an extradition treaty - the same reason senior Kremlin officials
have given in saying they have no plan to repatriate Mr. Snowden.

Mr. Snowden, who faces criminal espionage charges for leaking classified
information about the National Security Agency's surveillance programs, has
requested temporary asylum in Russia.

Mr. Snowden has accused the United States of violating international law by
preventing him from traveling to Latin America, where three countries have
expressed a willingness to take him.

A decision on Mr. Snowden's application for temporary asylum by officials from
the Federal Migration Service could come any day. By applying for temporary
rather than political asylum, Mr. Snowden took the easiest route to permission
for an extended stay in Russia, according to Anatoly G. Kucherena, a Russian
lawyer who is advising him.

While President Vladimir V. Putin is widely believed to have the ultimate say
over Mr. Snowden's request, applications for temporary asylum technically do not
need the president's personal approval and are routinely granted directly by the
Federal Migration Service.

The Obama administration has been pressing Russia to detain Mr. Snowden and send
him to Washington. In recent days officials have sent signals that President
Barack Obama is considering canceling a planned summit meeting in Moscow in
September, frustrated by the Snowden case as well as disagreements over human
rights and how to end the civil war in Syria.

The Kremlin has repeatedly said it does not want Mr. Snowden's case to harm
bilateral relations but also has shown no willingness to turn him over to the
U.S. authorities. ''This position remains unchanged,'' Mr. Putin's spokesman,
Dmitri S. Peskov, said over the weekend.

Mr. Peskov added that Mr. Putin had more important things to think about. ''
Snowden cannot top the president's schedule,'' he said.

In complaining about the U.S. refusal to grant Russian extradition requests,
Andrey Pilipchuk, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry, cited the examples of
Ilyas Akhmadov, a former senior leader of the Chechen separatist movement who is
accused by Russia of terrorism, and Tamaz Nalbandov, who is accused of
kidnapping and extortion as part of an organized crime group. Both have been
living in the United States for several years.

In Mr. Akhmadov's case, American officials have said they found no evidence that
he was connected to terrorism.

Separately on Monday, Mr. Kucherena, the Kremlin-connected lawyer who has been
assisting Mr. Snowden, accused U.S. Embassy officials in Moscow of not showing
any concern about Mr. Snowden, even though he has been living in the transit
zone of Sheremetyevo airport since June 23, when he arrived on a flight from
Hong Kong.

On Twitter, the American ambassador, Michael A. McFaul, wrote, ''Mr. Snowden
ought to be returned to the United States to face the felony charges against
him.''

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              98 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     July 24, 2013 Wednesday 07:13 PM GMT+4

Snowden has his fingerprints taken for temporary asylum in Russia

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 24


- U.S. National Security Agency leader Edward Snowden has his fingerprints taken
when filing an appeal for temporary asylum in Russia, lawyer Anatoly Kucherena
said after visiting the former American security service agent at Moscow's
Sheremetyevo Airport on Wednesday, July 24.

"Snowden has his fingerprints taken when submitting the appeal," Kucherena said,
adding that he had watched the process.

He said Snowden cannot leave Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone yet as
no document allowing him to do so has so far been issued by the Federal
Migration Service (FMS).

"The question has not been solved yet... Snowden took it with understanding," he
said.

The lawyer admitted that the Snowden situation in unique. "He has not been
denied anything [by the FMS]. This issue is under consideration," he said.

Kucherena declined to say when the decision may be made. "I will not name any
dates," he said, adding that, in his opinion, there is no violation because an
appeal may considered for as long as three months.

Source said earlier that the Federal Migration Service had issued a document to
Snowden, which allows him to stay in Russia pending the decision on his appeal
for asylum.

Kucherena said Snowden cannot give interviews at the moment for security
reasons.

"Snowden is concerned about his security. He asked for understanding. He is
ready to give interviews but he cannot do that for reasons of [his own] security
until the matter is decided," the lawyer said.

At the same time, he said that Snowden wants to find a job in Russia. "He wants
to stay here as a place of permanent residence and wants to find a job and
organise his life somehow," Kucherena said and noted that Snowden also wants to
travel around Russia.

"He is not going to leave Russia after he gets the document and he has named
Russia as his final destination," the lawyer told Russia 24 television.

He said Snowden asked for temporary political asylum, which is granted for one
year.

Kucherena came to the airport, bringing new shirts and pizza for the former NSA
agent.

The lawyer said Snowden had asked him for a meeting himself. "He calls me and I
explain the situation with his documents to him." Kucherena said.

"Snowden thanked those who telephone him and offer help and things. This is a
normal situation. I bought several new shirts for him. He is in a fair mood,"
the lawyer said.

"I brought pizza and we ate it with big pleasure," he added.

The lawyer said he had brought Fyodor Dostoyevsky's "Crime and Punishment" to
Snowden. He thinks "he [Snowden] should read it, especially about Raskolnikov."

"I am not talking about the similarity of inner contradictions," Kucherena told
Russia 24 television, adding that he had brought Chekhov's works "for dessert."

The lawyer entered the airport's transit zone through the entrance used by
personnel only, carrying a large bag, in which he said there were "a pair of
jeans and a couple of T-shirts for Snowden."

Snowden arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport from Hong Kong on June 23 and has been
staying in its transition zone since then. He has applied for temporary asylum
in Russia.

Earlier he had passed to the press information about mass electronic
surveillance by the U.S. authorities under the PRISM programme and claimed that
American security services watched and recorded people's actions and
conversations even if they did nothing wrong.

He said security services were gathering information primarily about the users
of popular search servers and social networks.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              99 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     July 24, 2013 Wednesday 06:39 PM GMT+4

Snowden cannot leave transit zone yet, question not solved

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 24


- U.S. National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden cannot leave Moscow's
Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone yet as no document allowing him to do so has
so far been issued by the Federal Migration Service, lawyer Anatoly Kucherena
said on Wednesday, July 24.

"The question has not been solved yet... Snowden took it with understanding," he
said after a meeting with the man at the airport.

Kucherena said, though, that Snowden wants to find a job in Russia.

The lawyer said he had brought Fyodor Dostoyevsky's "Crime and Punishment" to
Snowden. He thinks "he [Snowden] should read it, especially about Raskolnikov."

"I am not talking about the similarity of inner contradictions," Kucherena told
Russia 24 television, adding that he had brought Chekhov's works "for dessert."

The lawyer entered the airport's transit zone through the entrance used by
personnel only, carrying a large bag, in which he said there were "a pair of
jeans and a couple of T-shirts for Snowden."

Snowden arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport from Hong Kong on June 23 and has been
staying in its transition zone since then. He has applied for temporary asylum
in Russia.

Earlier he had passed to the press information about mass electronic
surveillance by the U.S. authorities under the PRISM programme and claimed that
American security services watched and recorded people's actions and
conversations even if they did nothing wrong.

He said security services were gathering information primarily about the users
of popular search servers and social networks.

His stay in Russia has evoked a controversial reaction in the United States.
Secretary of State John Kerry called for "calm and reasonableness" in dealing
with the Snowden issue.

"We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice. We're not looking for a confrontation. We are not ordering anybody,"
Kerry said.

The U.S. government keeps insisting on Snowden's extradition. However Most
Russians think that Moscow should not extradite Snowden to the United States,
according to a poll conducted by the Public Opinion Foundation (FOM).

The poll was conducted on July 14 in 43 regions of Russia and involved 1,500
respondents. The margin of error does not exceed 3.6 percent.

"Thirty-nine of respondents believe that Russia should not extradite Snowden to
the American authorities," the FOM said on Wednesday, July 17.

At the same time, 18 percent of those polled think that Snowden should be
extradited to the United States. Fifty-nine percent are not aware of who Snowden
is.

About 27 percent of Russians think that Russia should give political asylum to
Snowden, while 23 percent are of the opinion that Moscow should not do this. One
in two respondents was undecided.

Commenting on the issue of Snowden's possible extradition to the United States,
President Vladimir Putin said earlier: "Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the
sooner he chooses his final destination the better it is for us and for him. I
hope it will not affect the business-like character of our relations with the
U.S. and I hope that our partners will understand that."

Snowden will leave Russia as soon as such an opportunity presents itself but the
situation remains unclear, Putin said.

"It is in limbo right now but as soon as he has an opportunity to move elsewhere
he will certainly do so," he said. "He knows the terms of granting political
asylum and, judging from his latest statements, he is changing his position, but
the situation is not completely clear yet."

The United States has basically blocked Snowden in Russia by not letting other
countries allow him to travel through their territories, the president said. "He
arrived in our territory without invitation. He was travelling to other
countries as a transit passenger. But as soon as he was airborne and this became
known, our American partners had basically blocked his further movement," Putin
said.

"They also frightened all other countries and no one wants to receive him. So
they have basically blocked him on our territory," he added.

When asked about Snowden's further fate, Putin replied: "How should I know? It's
his life and his fate."

"After all he wants to move to a place of permanent residence and wants to live
permanently elsewhere," the president said.

He recalled that Snowden had been offered to stay in Russia on condition that he
stopped his political activities. "We have certain relations with the United
States and we do not want your activities to damage our relations with the U.S.
He said no. You are laughing but I am being serious. He said he wanted to
continue his activities, he wanted to fight for human rights and he thought that
the U.S. violated certain norms of international law and interfered in private
life, and his goal was to fight that. We said: do so but without us. We have
other things to fight," Putin said.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              103 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                  Korea Times

                              July 19, 2013 Friday

NSA leaker's life in limbo

BYLINE: By Dale McFeatters

LENGTH: 464 words


Vladimir Putin is not a figure who invites sympathy, but anyone who has ever had
a houseguest who wouldn't leave has to feel something for the Russian president.

National Security Agency secrets-spiller Edward Snowden will mark his one-month
anniversary Tuesday of being an uninvited and, as Putin has made clear, unwanted
guest of the transit lounge of Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport.

Putin blamed the fact that Russia is stuck with Snowden, perhaps indefinitely,
on the U.S., and for a change in the Kremlin's reflexive "blame America first"
default position, he has a point.

After Snowden, an NSA contract employee who stunned even Americans with his
revelations of the breadth and depth of the agency's electronic spying, fled,
first to Hong Kong and then Moscow, the U.S. revoked his passport, without which
Snowden cannot travel.

Three Latin American countries Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have offered him
asylum, but with a catch: He has to get there first. The U.S. has used its
immense diplomatic clout to make it as difficult as possible for him to travel
because U.S. authorities want him back here.

Russia has refused to extradite him to the United States on the quite-plausible
grounds we wouldn't do the same if the situation were reversed. But Putin has
made it unmistakably clear he wants Snowden gone.

Putin does not want a renegade U.S. spy distracting from two upcoming high-level
visits by President Barack Obama to Russia, meetings in which both countries
have much invested.

But Snowden formally asked the Russians this week for asylum. According to the
Daily Beast and CNN, Putin has said that Snowden can stay if he ceases all
political activities, which Putin says Snowden refused to commit to, and that he
"stop his work aimed at harming our American partners."

Snowden told Russian officials that he had no intention of hurting U.S.
interests, and in almost the same breath, said he was afraid of being tortured
and executed if returned to the U.S., a declaration that hardly burnishes
America's image.

"I've said all I knew, and I will not harm the United States in the future,"
Snowden reportedly assured a Russian lawyer helping him win asylum.

But the Guardian's Glenn Greenwald, who has been acting as something of
Snowden's publicity impresario, said that as precautionary insurance he has
stashed some of his papers with certain news organizations.

"The U.S. government should be on their knees every day praying that nothing
happens to Snowden, because if something happens, all information will be
revealed, and that would be their worst nightmare," Greenwald told the Guardian.

Actually, an even worse nightmare might be being trapped indefinitely in an
airport transit lounge.

The author is an editorial writer for Scripps Howard News Service.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Korea Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              104 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                             July 18, 2013 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Snowden pursues easy path lodging Russian asylum bid

BYLINE: David Herszenhorn; in Moscow

SECTION: A; Pg. A011

LENGTH: 459  words


Snowden pursues easy path lodging Russian asylum bid By David Herszenhorn in
Moscow Edward Snowden, the former intelligence contractor on the run from US
authorities, formally requested temporary asylum in Russia on Tuesday,
submitting an application that seemed aimed at insulating President Vladimir
Putin from US pressure and blame.

Mr Snowden said he feared that if returned to the United States he could face
torture or the death penalty, according to a Russian lawyer who helped prepare
the documents.

Though he has not been accused of a capital crime, experts here said that his
fears, whatever their merit, could support his bid.

At the same time, by seeking temporary - and not political - asylum, Mr Snowden
is pursuing the easiest path under Russian law, requiring only an administrative
decision by the Russian Federal Migration Service rather than MrPutin's personal
approval.

There is little doubt, however, that Mr Putin controls all decisions on Mr
Snowden - just as the Kremlin has permitted, if not orchestrated, his stay in
the transit zone of Sheremetyevo airport since his arrival from Hong Kong on
June 23.

But the technicality provides some insulation for Putin from political pressure
by the United States.

Mr Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, quickly said the decision was out of the
President's hands.

If the Migration Service grants his request, Mr Snowden will be able to live and
work in Russia for one year, with the possibility of renewing his status for
another year. Just by his applying, it seems likely his stay in the airport
transit zone is nearing an end.

Officials said that as an asylum applicant, Mr Snowden could be moved from the
airport to a shelter for refugees while awaiting a decision, which could come in
days.

Mr Putin has said Mr Snowden could potentially stay in Russia, provided he
"cease his work aimed at inflicting damage on our American partners", and he
reiterated that offer on Monday. Mr Snowden has said he does not believe his
leaks have harmed US interests.

In a meeting at the airport on Friday with lawyers and rights advocates that the
Russian government helped organise, Mr Snowden said he would apply for shelter
in Russia because the US was blocking him from travelling to Latin America,
where three countries say they will accept him.

Anatoly Kucherena, a lawyer who attended the meeting, said that he had helped Mr
Snowden prepare the application and showed a copy of the handwritten document
during an appearance on television.

"As for his reasons, he wrote that the government of the US is chasing him, that
he is afraid for his life and fears that it may end in torture or the death
penalty," Mr Kucherena said.

The White House on Tuesday repeated its demand for his extradition. New York
Times

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


       Copyright 2013 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              105 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             July 18, 2013 Thursday

Putin sees no harm for U.S.-Russia ties;
Leader says 'squabbles' over Snowden less critical than partnership

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

President Vladimir V. Putin said the broader relationship with the United States
was more important than "squabbles" over whether Edward J. Snowden should be
granted asylum in Russia.

FULL TEXT

President Vladmir V. Putin signaled on Wednesday that he expected the broader
bilateral relationship with the United States would not be harmed if Russia
granted asylum to Edward J. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor on the
run from the U.S. authorities.

In reply to a question about the implications of Mr. Snowden's case for
relations with the United States, Mr. Putin effectively accused Washington of
hypocrisy by providing robust support for human rights advocates in other
circumstances but not in a case like Mr. Snowden's, in which the United States
is being criticized.

''Bilateral relations, in my opinion, are much more important than the squabbles
around the activities of the security services,'' Mr. Putin said while on a
visit to the Trans-Baikal region in eastern Siberia to review a military
training exercise, according to a Kremlin transcript.

Mr. Putin and other prominent Russian officials have made clear that they view
Mr. Snowden as an advocate for human rights and a crusader for personal
liberties for his leaks exposing the National Security Agency's surveillance
programs.

Mr. Snowden on Tuesday formally applied for temporary asylum in Russia - a
request that could be granted within days and allow him to live and work here
for a year or more.

Mr. Putin has said that asylum for Mr. Snowden is a possibility if he stops
harming the interests of the United States.

''We warned Mr. Snowden that any of his activities that cause damage to
U.S.-Russian relations are unacceptable to us,'' Mr. Putin said Wednesday.

''Human rights work is generally associated with certain costs for those who do
it,'' he continued. ''But when such activities are conducted under the auspices
of the United States and with their financial support, information and political
backing, it is comfortable enough to do. But if someone is going to criticize
the United States itself, it is, of course, much more complicated.''

Mr. Putin pointed to the efforts in Europe to block the plane of President Evo
Morales of Bolivia because of fears Mr. Snowden was on board. But he also
expressed some bewilderment about Mr. Snowden's ultimate goals.

''He's a young man,'' he said. ''In fact, I do not even really understand how he
intends to continue to build his life. But it was his destiny and his choice.
And we have our own national objectives.''

He added: ''Russia has an independent foreign policy, and we will implement it.
I hope that our partners understand and react to this with calm understanding.''

Mr. Snowden's application for temporary asylum seemed aimed at insulating Mr.
Putin from U.S. pressure and blame. According to a Russian lawyer who helped
prepared the documents, Mr. Snowden said he feared that if returned to the
United States he could face torture or the death penalty. Although he has not
been accused of a capital crime and does not face the death penalty, experts
here said that his expressed fears, whatever their merit, could support his bid.

At the same time, by seeking temporary - not political - asylum, Mr. Snowden is
pursuing the easiest path possible under Russian law, technically requiring only
a decision by the Russian Federal Migration Service rather than Mr. Putin's
personal approval.

There is little doubt that Mr. Putin controls all decisions on Snowden, just as
the Kremlin has permitted, if not orchestrated, his stay in the transit zone of
Sheremetyevo Airport since his arrival from Hong Kong on June 23. But the
technicality provides some insulation for Mr. Putin from political pressure by
the United States.

The president's spokesman, Dmitry S. Peskov, quickly said that the decision was
out of Mr. Putin's hands. ''If we are talking about temporary asylum, this is an
issue not for the president but for the Federal Migration Service,'' Mr. Peskov
told reporters in the Siberian city of Chita, according to Russian news
agencies.

If the Migration Service grants his request, Mr. Snowden will be able to live
and work in Russia for one year, with the possibility of renewing his status for
another year. And just by his applying, it seems likely that his stay in the
airport transit zone is nearing an end. Officials said that as an asylum
applicant, Mr. Snowden could now be moved from the airport to a shelter for
refugees while awaiting a decision.

The White House on Tuesday repeated its demand for Mr. Snowden's extradition.
''He should return here to face trial,'' said the White House spokesman, Jay
Carney. ''Our interest has always been in seeing him expelled from Russia and
returned to the United States,'' he said. ''He is not a human rights activist.
He is not a dissident.''

Federal prosecutors in Virginia have charged Mr. Snowden with two counts of
violating the Espionage Act and also with stealing government property - each
charge punishable by up to 10 years in prison, for a total of 30 years. But Mr.
Snowden and his supporters in and outside Russia have cited the existence of the
death penalty in the United States as a reason he should not be extradited,
noting that U.S. officials have said he could face additional charges.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              106 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             July 18, 2013 Thursday

Putin puts U.S. ties above case of Snowden;
Russian president calls bilateral relations more urgent than 'squabbles'

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and ANDREW ROTH

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 615 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

The Russian president also effectively accused Washington of hypocrisy by
providing support for human rights advocates in other circumstances, but not in
this case.

FULL TEXT

President Vladimir V. Putin signaled on Wednesday that he expected the broader
relationship with the United States to be unharmed if Russia granted asylum to
Edward J. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor on the run from American
authorities.

In reply to a question about Mr. Snowden's case, Mr. Putin effectively accused
Washington of hypocrisy by providing robust support for human rights advocates
in other circumstances but not in a case like Mr. Snowden's.

''Bilateral relations, in my opinion, are much more important than the squabbles
around the activities of the security services,'' Mr. Putin said while on a
visit to the Trans-Baikal region in eastern Siberia to review a military
training exercise, according to a Kremlin transcript.

Mr. Putin and other Russian officials have made clear that they view Mr. Snowden
as an advocate for human rights and a crusader for personal liberties for his
leaks exposing the National Security Agency's surveillance programs.

Mr. Snowden applied on Tuesday for temporary asylum in Russia - a request that
could be granted within days.

Anatoly Kucherena, a lawyer and rights advocate advising Mr. Snowden in Moscow,
confirmed on Wednesday that the American may be able to leave the airport
transit zone and enter Russia through passport control in the next several days,
once the Federal Migration Service gives him official confirmation that his
application for temporary asylum is under review.

He said that Mr. Snowden had decided to pursue temporary asylum after realizing
the United States was determined not to let him travel. ''I expected that they
could persecute me, but I didn't expect it to be so crude, so out of measure,''
Mr. Kucherena quoted Mr. Snowden as saying. ''They have completely driven me
into a corner.''

Mr. Snowden chose to apply for temporary asylum to circumvent the bureaucracy
associated with applications for political asylum, which can take up to three
months to process, Mr. Kucherena said.

If he entered Russia, Mr. Snowden would have the freedom to choose where to live
and would not have to surrender himself to Russian authorities, Mr. Kucherena
added.

He said that Mr. Snowden ''had not excluded the possibility'' of applying for
Russian citizenship, but that he had no such plans currently.

Mr. Putin has said asylum for Mr. Snowden is a possibility if he stops harming
America's interests.

''We warned Mr. Snowden that any of his activities that cause damage to
U.S.-Russian relations are unacceptable to us,'' Mr. Putin said Wednesday.

''Human rights work is generally associated with certain costs for those who do
it,'' he added. ''When such activities are conducted under the auspices of the
United States and with their financial support, information and political
backing, it is comfortable enough to do. But if someone is going to criticize
the United States itself, it is, of course, much more complicated.'' Mr. Putin
pointed to the efforts in Europe to block the plane of President Evo Morales of
Bolivia two weeks ago because of fears that Mr. Snowden was on board.

But Mr. Putin also expressed some bewilderment about Mr. Snowden's ultimate
goals.

''He's a young man,'' Mr. Putin said. ''In fact, I do not even really understand
how he intends to continue to build his life. But it was his destiny and his
choice. And we have our own national objectives.''

He added: ''Russia has an independent foreign policy, and we will implement it.
I hope that our partners understand and react to this with calm,
understanding.''

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              107 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     July 18, 2013 Thursday 11:36 AM GMT+4

Russian press review - 1 (ITAR-TASS World Service)

LENGTH: 870 words


SNOWDEN CASE THREATENS TO AGGRAVATE US-RUSSIA RELATIONS

The US Congress is preparing a response in case the Russian Federation provides
asylum to fugitive CIA analyst Edward Snowden. It is proposed, in particular, to
expand the "Magnitsky list" and reconsider the decision to refuse from the
implementation of the final phase of European missile defence. The Kremlin
believes that the "Snowden factor" is a legitimate cause for the relations'
worsening. Lawyer Anatoly Kucherena who gives Snowden legal advice said that the
ex-CIA employee may request Russian citizenship, the Nezavisimaya Gazeta
newspaper writes. The more so that refugee status implies a shorter period of
consideration of such an application.

However, prominent Russian politicians and political analysts who believe that
granting citizenship to Snowden will lead to deterioration of relations with the
United States, have opposed this possibility.

Kucherena is certain: Snowden will leave the transit zone as soon as he is
handed an official certificate of receipt his application for temporary asylum,
and this procedure will take no more than a week. Then Snowden will be staying
in a hotel or a refugee centre, observing the migration registration regime.
Getting of political asylum does not provide for the issuance of a passport:
Snowden will not be able to leave Russia with these documents. The refugee
status ceases when a person leaves the country.

"We should not cross swords over Snowden, the more so that influential US
politicians have already called for boycotting the Sochi Olympics," the
newspaper quotes Federation Council member Igor Morozov who referred to the
words of Republican US Senator Lindsey Graham. He said the United States should
consider boycotting the 2014 Sochi Olympics if Russia grants asylum to the
leaker.

In the view of head of the Centre for Political Technologies Igor Bunin,
blackmail associated with Snowden is spiralling between Russia and the United
States. Pressure is exerted from both sides: the Russian side threatens to give
Snowden citizenship if, for example, the US president does not arrive in St.
Petersburg. "We are threatening to give Snowden citizenship if the US side makes
an unfriendly act, and the United States threatens us with unfriendly acts if we
provide temporary asylum to Snowden," the political analyst told the
Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper. "This is purely a diplomatic blackmail struggle."

The request for temporary political asylum is actually Snowden's only chance to
get out of the legal impasse in which he has found himself due to the
persecution by the US government, believes the RF government's Rossiyskaya
Gazeta daily. The Americans, according to lawyer Kucherena, themselves are doing
everything possible for the fugitive CIA employee's longest possible stay in
Russia. "The United States have made no formal requests for extradition of
Snowden," Kucherena explained. "We hear only political statements from the
American side. There are no international law norms, which would allow Russia in
this situation to extradite him to America."

The fact that the US Congress is preparing response measures against the Russian
Federation has been confirmed by the author of the Magnitsky Act, Sen. Benjamin
Cardin, the Kommersant daily writes. Cardin said that he is not ready to
disclose the details, but the response will certainly be given. It looks like
the US administration also shares the US lawmakers' resolute attitude. According
to US presidential press secretary Jay Carney, the White House has already
transferred to the governments of other countries information about how they
should treat Edward Snowden. "Our interest has always been in seeing him
expelled from Russia and returned to the United States," said Carney, noting
that Snowden "is not a human rights activist. He is not a dissident."

The US president's spokesman has confirmed that Barack Obama is still going to
take part in the G20 summit in St. Petersburg, but refused to answer the
question of whether a meeting between the presidents of Russia and the United
States would be held in Moscow before that.

As for Moscow, it regards "the Snowden factor" as a legitimate reason for the
cancellation of the summit and, accordingly, the deterioration of bilateral
relations. "Russia has an independent foreign policy, and we will pursue it,"
Russian President Vladimir Putin warned on Wednesday. "I hope that our partners
understand it and will take it calmly. Inter-state relations are much more
important than squabbling around intelligence services' activities."

According to Vice President of the Centre for Political Technologies Alexei
Makarkin, Russia thus makes it clear that it can provide asylum to Edward
Snowden, but is extremely negative to the US possible response that would
exacerbate tensions. "Putin's statement - it's a warning: Russia will regard the
US response actions as unfriendly steps," said the expert.

"For the Americans, the stakes are high in the Snowden case - the story with the
forced landing of the Bolivian President's plane in Europe has shown this,"
Makarkin said. "Clearly, the United States will not boycott the Olympics, but
may well curtail Obama's visit to Russia."

/more

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              108 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             July 18, 2013 Thursday

us intelligence leakerSnowden applies for Russia asylumPutin says relations with
washington outweigh squabbles over the case

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 879 words


Agence France-Presse

MOSCOW

Fugitive US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden has applied for temporary asylum
in Russia, ending three weeks of uncertainty after he arrived from Hong Kong to
escape the clutches of US justice.

The United States, which wants to put Snowden on trial for revealing sensational
details of its spying operations, rubbished any notion that fugitive was a
"dissident" and said he should be sent back home to face his charges.

Snowden made the application from the transit zone of state-controlled
Sheremetyevo airport where he has been stuck for the last three weeks.

"The application has been filed with the Russian authorities," said
Kremlin-friendly lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, who attended a dramatic airport
meeting between Snowden and rights activists, pro-Kremlin lawmakers and lawyers
on Friday.

"There is no other way to resolve this situation," Kucherena told AFP during an
interview in Moscow.

He said that Snowden would remain at the airport while the asylum request was
being processed. Only a translator had been present at their meeting on Tuesday
to make the application, he added.

"He fears for his life, safety, he fears that torture or death penalty could be
applied against him should he return to the United States," Kucherena said
separately in televised remarks.

"And under these circumstances, understanding his position and situation, the
Federal Migration Service should of course grant his request."

Russian Channel One TV showed the letter handwritten in English which Snowden
had handed over to the Russian authorities: "I hereby request your considering
the possibility of granting to me temporary asylum in the Russian Federation,"
it read.

The Federal Migration Service (FMS) confirmed it had received the application
but the Kremlin sought in public to distance itself from the process.

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said President Vladimir Putin was aware of
Snowden's application but added he would not be involved in the decision as
temporary asylum "is not a presidential issue". Russia appears wary of provoking
a full-blown diplomatic crisis with Washington over Snowden, at a time of
already strained relations with the United States.

Putin yesterday said Moscow's relations with Washington outweighed the
"squabbles" over a spying scandal revealed by US fugitive Edward Snowden, who
has applied for asylum in Russia.

"Relations between states are much more important than squabbles surrounding the
work of security services," Putin was quoted as saying by the RIA Novosti news
agency.

Putin's remarks came after the White House voiced opposition to Snowden's
request for a safe haven in Russia as he tries to evade US espionage charges.

On Tuesday, Snowden filed an application for temporary asylum with the Russian
migration service, starting a process that could take up to three months.

Putin, meanwhile, reiterated his earlier stance that Snowden would only be
welcome to stay in Russia if he did not harm the United States with further
leaks.

"We have warned Mr Snowden, that any activity on his part that has to do with
harming Russia-US relations is unacceptable for us," Putin said.

"This is his fate and his choice," Putin said of Snowden's request to stay in
Russia. "We have our own state interests, including those directed at building
Russia-US relations."

But after the asylum application, White House spokesman Jay Carney renewed calls
for Moscow to send Snowden back to the United States.

"He is not a human rights activist, he is not a dissident, he's accused of
leaking classified information," Carney told reporters. "He's been charged with
three felony counts ... and he should be returned to the United States," he
added.

Even though the Kremlin has said it has nothing to do with Snowden, political
observers have said that his meeting with activists at the airport would have
been impossible without Kremlin involvement.

"The way everything was organised so quickly, the whole logistics make it
obvious for us that there's an interest of the authorities," the head of Amnesty
International in Russia, Sergei Nikitin, said. "So the decision will probably be
positive."

Russian authorities generally consider an application for temporary asylum for
up to three months, with preliminary consideration taking up to five days.

Temporary asylum lasts for one year and would in theory give Snowden enough time
to find a way to leave Russia, possibly for Latin America. It then can be
extended every year for another 12 months.

The lawyer Kucherena said Snowden had no immediate plans to leave the country.

"Right now he wants to stay in Russia. He has options. He has friends and
supporters," he said. "Today I gave him a beginners' Russian book. He said it
was the first present Snowden had received in Sheremetyevo."

Snowden flew into Russia from Hong Kong on June 23 and has since been marooned
in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo. He was checked in for an Aeroflot flight to
Cuba on June 24 but never boarded the plane.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have indicated they would be open to offering
the 30-year-old a safe haven.

Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino of Ecuador, which had originally seemed ready to
offer Snowden asylum but then backtracked amid US pressure, said "let's hope"
Russia grants asylum to Snowden.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              110 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

US `trapped' Snowden in Russia

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 433  words


MOSCOW: Vladimir Putin has accused Washington of trapping US intelligence leaker
Edward Snowden in Moscow, saying he would leave Russia as soon as possible.

``As soon as there's the chance to move somewhere, he will certainly do this,''
the Russian President said yesterday. ``He arrived on our territory uninvited,
he did not fly to us, he was flying in transit to other countries.

``But as soon as he was in the air, it became known, and our American partners
essentially blocked off his further flight.''

These were Mr Putin's first public remarks since Mr Snowden, 30, met rights
activists and lawyers on Friday at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, where he is
stranded.

Mr Snowden arrived in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23 and the US revoked his
passport the same day.

Booked on a June 24 flight from Moscow to Havana, Cuba, he never boarded the
plane. Mr Snowden has been stranded in the airport's transit zone since then.

Mr Putin said of the US: ``They themselves scared off all the other countries,
no one wants to take him, and therefore they essentially themselves trapped him
on our territory.

``A nice gift to us for Christmas,'' he told Russian reporters travelling with
him on a visit to the island of Gogland in the Gulf of Finland.

He did not know what would become of Mr Snowden. ``How would I know? That's his
life, his fate,'' the President said.

But he did note a change in position by the former National Security Agency
contractor. Mr Snowden announced on Friday that he did, after all, want to apply
for asylum in Russia until he could travel on to Latin America, where several
countries have offered him asylum.

He had withdrawn his initial application after Mr Putin said this month that Mr
Snowden could claim asylum in Russia only if he stopped his leaks.

When Mr Snowden announced on Friday he was renewing his application, he said he
had promised not to harm US interests in the future.

``Judging by his latest statement, he is somewhat changing his position,'' Mr
Putin said. ``But the situation has not been finally clarified so far.''

He said nothing about whether Mr Snowden's application would be accepted.

Mr Snowden had vowed to continue his activism, Mr Putin said. ``We said, `That
will be without us, then. We have other battles to fight,' '' he said with a
smile.

In a sign that Moscow may seriously consider an application from him, the
Speaker of the lower house of parliament, the State Duma, Sergei Naryshkin, has
said Mr Snowden could apply for temporary asylum or political asylum.

Requests for political asylum are reviewed by the Kremlin and granted by the
President.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              111 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday
                          2 - All-round First Edition

Snowden in Russian asylum bid

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 422  words


MOSCOW: Fugitive US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden has applied for temporary
asylum in Russia, a pro-Kremlin lawyer said last night, after President Vladimir
Putin accused Washington of ``trapping'' him in Moscow.

Mr Snowden, wanted by the US for revealing sensational details of its vast
spying operations, is now spending a fourth week in the transit lounge at
Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport without crossing the Russian border.

``The application has been filed with the Russian authorities'' through the
Federal Migration Service,'' prominent lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, who has been in
contact with Mr Snowden, said.

``I have just left him,'' he said after meeting the fugitive yesterday.

FMS officials declined to comment.

Mr Kucherena participated in Mr Snowden's meeting with rights activists and
pro-Kremlin politicians at Sheremetyevo last week and said Mr Snowden had
contacted him for consultations after the get-together.

``He is actively consulting with me,'' Mr Kucherena said. ``After the meeting,
we've been in frequent touch.''

Mr Snowden flew into Russia from Hong Kong on June 23 and has since been
marooned in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo.

He was checked in for an Aeroflot flight to Cuba on June 24 but never boarded
the plane.

Mr Putin said Mr Snowden would leave Russia ``as soon as he can'', likening him
to an unwanted gift.

But he accused Washington of ``trapping'' the American in Moscow, saying no
country wanted to take in Mr Snowden because of US pressure.

Mr Kucherena said he was helping Mr Snowden negotiate the complexities of
Russian legislation and the difference between the status of refugee, political
asylum and temporary asylum.

``Before our consultations he did not have an understanding of those issues,''
the lawyer said.

``He needs to understand what suits him and what rights and obligations a
certain status will generate.''

Breaking his silence for the first time since he arrived, Mr Snowden, who is
essentially stateless after Washington revoked his passport, held the
closed-door meeting at the airport on Friday.

At the meeting, he said he would file for asylum in Russia before he could work
out a way to travel legally to Latin America, asking the activists to petition
Mr Putin on his behalf.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have indicated they would be open to offering
the 30-year-old a safe haven.

Activist Svetlana Gannushkina, who has championed the rights of refugees for
decades, said Russian authorities generally considered an application for
refugee status for up to three months.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              112 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday

Talk of Russia exchanging Snowden for citizens jailed in US "unacceptable" - MP

LENGTH: 721 words


Former CIA contractor Edward Snowden, who asked Russia for temporary asylum on
16 July, should not be exchanged for Russian citizens serving their prison
sentences in the USA, Russian Communist MP and deputy chairman of the State Duma
international affairs committee Leonid Kalashnikov believes. He said this in an
interview with Russian Gazprom-owned editorially-independent Ekho Moskvy radio
on 17 July.

On 2 July Liberal Democratic Party of Russia leader and head of its faction in
the State Duma Vladimir Zhirinovskiy said Snowden should be exchanged for
convicted armed smuggler Viktor But (Bout) and pilot Ilya (Konstantin)
Yaroshenko. Later Yaroshenko's mother appealed to the Russian Foreign Ministry,
asking him to exchange Snowden for her son.

"Is Snowden a serf or somebody's slave, for Zhirinovskiy or Yaroshenko's mother
to propose that he should be exchanged for someone? Is he our hostage? Why
should be raising the question in such a way? I absolutely do not accept this
and believe he [Snowden] deserves any refuge he can get, either temporary or
permanent. The silly things that are voiced by Zhirinovskiy or somebody else,
based on either political or common-sense convictions, are absolutely
unacceptable," Kalashnikov told Ekho Moskvy.

It is time Snowden left Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, human rights activist
Svetlana Gannushkina told Russian news agency Interfax later in the day.

"In my view, he can already leave Sheremetyevo. He has a certificate that he has
applied for asylum. This certificate gives him legal ground to get registered as
a migrant," Gannushkina, who specializes in rendering aid to refugees, said.

She is confident that Russia will grant asylum to Snowden. "There is every
reason to believe that his request will be granted. Some personal conditions
could be set, for example, he'll be told that he cannot be involved in politics
but his case falls within the [UN] Convention [on the Status of Refugees] and he
should be granted asylum," she said, adding: "I am confident he will not be
handed out to the USA."

Earlier Vladimir Volokh, the head of the public council under the Federal
Migration Service (FMS) and former deputy head of the FMS, told Interfax that
Snowden can become a Russian citizen if he wants to. "Given he receives
temporary asylum and refugee status, he can apply for Russian citizenship,
"Volokh said. Provided Snowden receives refugee status, his application for
Russian citizenship may be considered sooner, "in three years' time, if I'm not
mistaken," Volokh said.

After Snowden officially asked for temporary asylum in Russia, he cannot be
handed out to the USA, Volokh said. Snowden will be able to move freely around
Russia in three months' time, Volokh added. "It takes three months to receive
the refugee status; if additional investigation is necessary, the procedure may
last for another three months. After the status is received, he can move freely
around the Russian territory, letting [corresponding] agencies know about his
whereabouts," Volokh said.

Later in the day Interfax quoted Volokh as saying that Snowden may spend up to
one week at the transit zone of Sheremetyevo airport or at a centre for
asylum-seekers.

Meanwhile, a source in airport services told Interfax that Snowden is still at
Sheremetyevo and is not going to leave the airport any time soon.

"Edward Snowden is still at Sheremetyevo. We have not yet received a request to
move him to the centre for asylum-seekers, he is still here," the source said.
Snowden has modern conveniences at his disposal, he takes regular meals, the
source added. "He has a shower and other conveniences, there is everything here.
As far as we know, he has not yet packed his things," the agency quoted the
source as saying.

Russian state news agency RIA Novosti quoted Olga Kostina, a member of the
Russian Public Chamber, as saying that Russian human rights activists who took
part in a meeting with Snowden at the airport on 12 July, would wait for the
FMS's decision on Snowden's asylum and then, if need be, would consider sending
an appeal to the Russian authorities, raising the issue.

Sources: Ekho Moskvy radio, Moscow, in Russian 0700 gmt 17 Jul 13; Interfax news
agency, Moscow, in Russian 0818, 0635, 0853 and 0539 gmt 17 Jul 13; RIA Novosti
news agency, Moscow, in Russian 0707 gmt 17 Jul 13

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              113 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday

No legal grounds for Russia to extradite Snowden to USA - lawyer

LENGTH: 979 words


There are no legal grounds for Russia to extradite former CIA employee Edward
Snowden to the USA, Anatoliy Kucherena, the Russian lawyer who helped Snowden
prepare his asylum application, has said, privately-owned Interfax news agency
reported on 17 July.

"Russia cannot extradite him. There are no grounds to hand him over to the USA,"
Kucherena said.

He added that there is no agreement between Russia and the USA on legal
assistance.

"Has he committed a crime here? How can we extradite him?" he said.[1]

Snowden promises not to harm USA

Kucherena noted that Snowden has promised that he will not work to the detriment
of the USA.

"I know about this request. This wish, this requirement is accomplishable," he
quoted Snowden as saying.[2]

Kucherena said that Snowden has not given any written guarantee that he will not
cause damage to the USA, state news agency RIA Novosti reported.

"Such guarantees cannot be provided in any written form, therefore Snowden did
not give these commitments in writing," Kucherena said.[3]

"One counts on decency and honesty," Interfax quoted Kucherena as saying.[4]

Snowden planned revelations for a year

In an interview to privately-owned internet and satellite broadcaster Dozhd on
16 July, Kucherena said that Snowden had been planning his revelations for a
year.

"Snowden told me that he decided to expose the special services a year ago, he
was preparing for this," Kucherena said.[5]

He noted that, although he is not Snowden's representative in Russia, he is
ready to continue assisting him for free.[6]

Kucherena also said that Snowden is not planning to leave Russia.

"Snowden said that he would like to stay in Russia for a long time. He has no
plans to leave," Kucherena stated.[7]

Snowden to leave airport soon

Snowden will leave the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport in the near
future, Kucherena said, Interfax reported on 17 July.

"The question of providing him temporary asylum will take not more than one
week. I think that in the next few days he will have the opportunity to leave
Sheremetyevo's transit zone," Kucherena said.[8]

"No-one will keep him there; he has the right to go where he wants," he said.

He added that Snowden can leave the airport as soon as he is given documentation
to confirm that an application for temporary asylum has been received from him.

According to Kucherena, Snowden decided to formalize the procedure for receiving
temporary asylum more quickly, in order to leave Sheremetyevo. "This is a
restriction. I equate it with house arrest," he said.[9]

Answering a question from RIA Novosti, Kucherena noted that Snowden is still
staying at the capsule hotel at the airport.

"He is living in the capsule hotel and I am sure that he has resided there for
the whole time that he has been here since he arrived," Kucherena said.[10]

If asylum refused, Snowden can appeal

If Snowden's temporary asylum application is refused, he has the right to
appeal, Kucherena said.

"If a decision is taken to grant him temporary asylum, it will remain in force
for a year with the possibility of extending for another year. If the relevant
authorization document is refused, he can appeal against the Federal Migration
Service's [FMS] decision in the Russian courts," Kucherena said.

He noted that Snowden himself is concerned that he may be handed over to the US
authorities.

"If the court upholds the FMS's refusal to issue the authorization document, he
will be forced to return to Sheremetyevo's transit zone, since he will not have
grounds to be on the territory of the Russian Federation," Kucherena said.[11]

If Snowden leaves Russia, he will lose the status of a refugee, Kucherena told
RIA Novosti.[12]

Snowden doesn't qualify for state protection

Snowden does not qualify for state protection in Russia, even though there is a
theoretical threat to his life, Interfax quoted Kucherena as saying.[13]

"Under that law on refugee status, the provision of state protection is not
provided for. He will have the same rights as any other person who comes under
this law," Kucherena said.

Chapman marriage proposal not discussed

Kucherena said that he has not discussed with Snowden the marriage proposal made
by former Russian spy Anna Chapman earlier in July. He said that a girl called
Sarah, who is acting as Snowden's helper, is always next to Snowden at
Sheremetyevo.

"I do not know what his relationship is with Sara, therefore I did not discuss
Anna Chapman's proposal," Kucherena said.[14]

USA won't boycott Sochi Olympics

Relations between Russia and the USA will not deteriorate because of Snowden and
the USA will not boycott the Winter Olympics in 2014, RIA Novosti reported
Kucherena as saying.[15]

"Russia and the USA are two great powers and I do not think that our humane
attitude towards an American citizen can aggravate relations between the two
countries. And I think that the Olympics in Sochi will not be boycotted, and our
relations will be normal," Kucherena said.

[1] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1112 gmt 17 Jul 13

[2] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1114 gmt 17 Jul 13

[3] RIA Novosti news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1122 gmt 17 Jul 13

[4] See [2]

[5] https://twitter.com/tvrain/status/357210577711542272

[6] https://twitter.com/tvrain/status/357213537929666560

[7] https://twitter.com/tvrain/status/357219076482936833

[8] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1002 gmt 17 Jul 13

[9] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1116 gmt 17 Jul 13

[10] RIA Novosti news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1121 gmt 17 Jul 13

[11] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1137 gmt 17 Jul 13

[12] RIA Novosti news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1143 gmt 17 Jul 13

[13] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1123 gmt 17 Jul 13

[14] Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1144 gmt 17 Jul 13

[15] RIA Novosti news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1150 gmt 17 Jul 13

Sources as listed in Russian 17 Jul 13

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              114 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden formally asks Russia for asylum;
Ex-N.S.A. contractor says he may face death penalty if sent home

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

Edward J. Snowden cited fears that he could face torture or the death penalty if
extradited to the United States, according to a Russian official.

FULL TEXT

Edward J. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor on the run from the U.S.
authorities, formally applied on Tuesday for temporary asylum in Russia, citing
fears that he could face torture or the death penalty if extradited to the
United States, according to a Russian official who assisted in preparing the
documents.

Mr. Snowden, whose leak of National Security Agency information has set off a
worldwide debate over the U.S. government's surveillance programs, has not been
accused of a capital crime and does not face the death penalty. His stated
fears, whatever their merit, will help him to meet requirements for asylum in
Russia.

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has said that he would consider allowing
Mr. Snowden to stay in Russia, provided that he ''cease his work aimed at
inflicting damage on our American partners.'' Mr. Putin reiterated that offer on
Monday while meeting with science students, but he said that Mr. Snowden had
initially refused and that the situation remained uncertain. Mr. Snowden has
said he does not believe his leaks have harmed U.S. interests.

The formal submission of the asylum application on Tuesday seemed to clear
things up - at least for the moment - and suggested that the end of Mr.
Snowden's long sojourn at Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow, where he arrived from
Hong Kong on June 23, might finally be in sight.

The anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has been assisting Mr. Snowden,
posted a message on the Internet confirming the submission of his asylum
application.

At a meeting Friday with human rights advocates and lawyers, Mr. Snowden said he
would request temporary shelter in Russia but ultimately planned to go to Latin
America, where three countries have expressed a willingness to take him. He
accused the United States of violating international law by blocking him from
traveling there right away.

Anatoly Kucherena, a rights advocate who has worked closely with the Kremlin,
who was one of the officials to meet with Mr. Snowden on Friday, confirmed the
submission of the asylum application. In an interview on the Rossiya 24
television station, Mr. Kucherena said he had helped Mr. Snowden prepare the
documents at the airport and had delivered them to the Federal Migration
Service, which handles such requests.

The Kremlin did not offer any immediate assessment of Mr. Snowden's chances. Mr.
Putin's spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, told Russian news agencies that the
Migration Service was handling the application. He said that Mr. Putin, who was
traveling in the Far East and Siberia on Tuesday, was focused on domestic
issues.

In the past week a number of prominent Russians, many of them
conservative-leaning Kremlin loyalists, have spoken in Mr. Snowden's favor,
characterizing him as a defender of human rights who was deserving of
protection.

Federal prosecutors in Virginia have charged Mr. Snowden with two counts of
violating the Espionage Act and also with stealing government property - each
charge punishable by up to 10 years in prison, for a total of 30 years.

But Mr. Snowden and his supporters in and outside of Russia have cited the
existence of the death penalty in the United States as a reason he should not be
extradited, noting that U.S. officials have said he could face additional
charges.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              115 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                     July 17, 2013 Wednesday 09:02 PM GMT+4

Most Russians say Snowden should not be extradited to US

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 17


- Most Russians think that Moscow should not extradite U.S. National Security
Agency leaker Edward Snowden to the United States, according to a poll conducted
by the Public Opinion Foundation (FOM).

The poll was conducted on July 14 in 43 regions of Russia and involved 1,500
respondents. The margin of error does not exceed 3.6 percent.

"Thirty-nine of respondents believe that Russia should not extradite Snowden to
the American authorities," the FOM said on Wednesday, July 17.

At the same time, 18 percent of those polled think that Snowden should be
extradited to the United States. Fifty-nine percent are not aware of who Snowden
is.

About 27 percent of Russians think that Russia should give political asylum to
Snowden, while 23 percent are of the opinion that Moscow should not do this. One
in two respondents was undecided.

Snowden is staying in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport and has
applied for temporary asylum in Russia.

Commenting on the issue of Snowden's possible extradition to the United States,
President Vladimir Putin said earlier: "Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the
sooner he chooses his final destination the better it is for us and for him. I
hope it will not affect the business-like character of our relations with the
U.S. and I hope that our partners will understand that."

Snowden will leave Russia as soon as such an opportunity presents itself but the
situation remains unclear, Putin said.

"It is in limbo right now but as soon as he has an opportunity to move elsewhere
he will certainly do so," he said. "He knows the terms of granting political
asylum and, judging from his latest statements, he is changing his position, but
the situation is not completely clear yet."

The United States has basically blocked Snowden in Russia by not letting other
countries allow him to travel through their territories, the president said. "He
arrived in our territory without invitation. He was travelling to other
countries as a transit passenger. But as soon as he was airborne and this became
known, our American partners had basically blocked his further movement," Putin
said.

"They also frightened all other countries and no one wants to receive him. So
they have basically blocked him on our territory," he added.

When asked about Snowden's further fate, Putin replied: "How should I know? It's
his life and his fate."

"After all he wants to move to a place of permanent residence and wants to live
permanently elsewhere," the president said.

He recalled that Snowden had been offered to stay in Russia on condition that he
stop his political activities. "We have certain relations with the United States
and we do not want your activities to damage our relations with the U.S. He said
no. You are laughing but I am being serious. He said he wanted to continue his
activities, he wanted to fight for human rights and he thought that the U.S.
violated certain norms of international law and interfered in private life, and
his goal was to fight that. We said: do so but without us. We have other things
to fight," Putin said.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry called for "calm and reasonableness" in
dealing with the Snowden issue.

"We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice. We're not looking for a confrontation. We are not ordering anybody,"
Kerry said.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              119 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Snowden requests asylum in Russia

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


Former U.S. National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden officially
applied for temporary asylum in Russia on Tuesday, his attorney and the
WikiLeaks organization announced.

The application is for temporary refuge, not permanent political asylum, and
Snowden is expected to continue exploring options in Latin America or elsewhere.

"It is a compromise step as Russia doesn't want to utterly spoil its relations
with the United States, as tense as they are," said Olga Kostina, head of the
rights organization Soprotivleniye. She was among a number of human rights
advocates who met with Snowden on Friday at Sheremetyevo International Airport
in Moscow, where he has been staying since his arrival from Hong Kong on June
23.

WikiLeaks, which has been advising Snowden, announced his application in a
tweet: "Edward Snowden today has filed for a temporary protection visa with
Russia's ministry of immigration."

The Federal Migration Service, which has an office at Sheremetyevo, confirmed
that it had received the application. Snowden was reportedly accompanied by
Russian attorney Anatoly Kucherena.

"He filled this application in my presence, as there were many legislative and
legal questions," Kucherena told the RIA Novosti news agency after meeting with
Snowden in the airport's transit zone.

In the application, Snowden said he needs asylum because "he faces persecution
by the U.S. government and he fears for his life and safety, fears that he could
be subjected to torture and capital punishment," Kucherena said on Rossiya-24
television.

Kostina said that the temporary refugee status could be granted within three
months, at which point Snowden could leave the airport and move to a center for
temporary refugees.

"It is a good way out for Snowden in the given situation, because it could give
him more time to decide what to do next," she said. "He told us last Friday that
he wanted to travel to one of the countries in Latin America which were ready to
grant him political asylum, but considerations of personal security prevailed
and he realized that it would be safe for him to stay in Russia even
temporarily."

The presidents of Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have said that Snowden would
be welcome in their countries, but his exit from Russia has been complicated by
his lack of a valid passport. The U.S. canceled his passport when it issued a
warrant for his arrest.

Russia and the United States do not have an extradition treaty, and President
Vladimir Putin has promised that Snowden would not be arrested and sent home for
prosecution, although he also has expressed the hope that Snowden would leave
Russia soon. Putin also has said that Russia will not grant Snowden asylum
unless he agrees to stop activities that harm the U.S., a condition that Putin
said Snowden is unwilling to meet.

Snowden, who worked in Hawaii for the NSA, is wanted on espionage charges for
leaking highly sensitive classified data about the agency's surveillance of
international Internet and telephone accounts.

The effort to reach a temporary resolution of his situation will allow the
Kremlin to formally distance itself, Kostina said. A request for political
asylum would have to be decided by Putin, she said.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              120 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden less important than Russia-U.S. relations - Putin

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 696 words


President Vladimir Putin further distanced himself from NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden on Wednesday, suggesting he would not stick up for the fugitive former
CIA employee at the expense of Russia-U.S. relations.

'International relations, in my opinion, are more important than the special
services' hassles,' RIA Novosti quoted Putin as saying on Wednesday, referring
to Snowden, who submitted a request for temporary asylum in Russia the previous
day.

Snowden, a former contractor for the National Security Agency wanted by the
United States for leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, has
been stuck in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport for more than
three weeks since arriving from Hong Kong on June 23. He cannot leave the
premises because U.S. authorities have annulled his passport, and he does not
have a visa.

Putin told reporters that Snowden had been told he should not 'damage
Russia-American relations' while in Russia. He also suggested that if Russia
does grant him asylum, his stay in the country should not last long.

'He is a young man... We don't quite understand how he made his decision and how
he is going to shape his life in future,' Putin said.

Putin's comments came in contrast to statements from other Russian politicians
backing Snowden. About a dozen human rights activists met the NSA whistleblower
on Friday in Sheremetyevo Airport and later told media that Snowden risks
persecution in the United States.

Leading lawmakers, meanwhile, have urged a welcome for Snowden.

'Giving Snowden asylum will have a positive impact on Russia's image,' Alexei
Pushkov, head of the State Duma International Affairs Committee, wrote on his
Twitter. 'It will show that Russia in becoming involved in defending human
rights on an international level.'

Snowden, meanwhile, 'fears for his life, for his safety,' according to lawyer
Anatoly Kucherena, a member of Russia's Public Chamber advisory body, who helped
Snowden draft his temporary asylum request on Tuesday.

'He is scared that he will be tortured or executed,' Kucherena said in remarks
carried by the Rossiya-24 channel.

The United States has continued to urge that Snowden be extradited, with a U.S.
lawmaker calling on a boycott of the Sochi 2014 Olympics in case Snowden is
allowed to stay in Russia.

"I love the Olympics, but I hate what the Russian government is doing throughout
the world," Senator Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., was quoted by NBC News as saying on
Tuesday. "If they give asylum to a person who I believe has committed treason
against the United States, that's taking it to a new level."

Washington on Tuesday called on Russia to reject Snowden's asylum request and
warned that the case could cause 'long-term problems in U.S.-Russia relations,'
RIA Novosti quoted White House spokesman Jay Carney as saying on Tuesday during
a news briefing.

Putin's comments on Wednesday suggested that Snowden would not likely get formal
political asylum in Russia, but that other options that did not involve
outright, public backing from the Kremlin were open to him.

Russia offers three asylum options - political asylum, refugee status, and
temporary asylum - all of which go through Russia's immigration agency, the
Federal Migration Service, according to RIA Novosti. Political asylum, given to
a person who fears political persecution outside the country, is an issue
ultimately decided by the president, according to the Constitution. Refugee
status is granted by the FMS to persons who fear persecution on grounds of face,
citizenship, race or other grounds. The decision takes up to three months,
though it can be longer in some cases. According to the FMS, about 33 percent of
25,931 refugee status applications between 1997 and 2007 were approved.

Snowden opted for temporary asylum, which is granted for 12 months to those who
have been refused refugee status or cannot be sent out of Russia for
'humanitarian reasons.' A person granted this status is allowed to live in the
country and travel.

Snowden would be able to leave the airport within several days, once he gets a
certificate stating that his request is being considered, Kucherena told Dozhd
TV on Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              125 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden less important than Russia-U.S. relations - Putin

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 696 words


President Vladimir Putin further distanced himself from NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden on Wednesday, suggesting he would not stick up for the fugitive former
CIA employee at the expense of Russia-U.S. relations.

'International relations, in my opinion, are more important than the special
services' hassles,' RIA Novosti quoted Putin as saying on Wednesday, referring
to Snowden, who submitted a request for temporary asylum in Russia the previous
day.

Snowden, a former contractor for the National Security Agency wanted by the
United States for leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, has
been stuck in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport for more than
three weeks since arriving from Hong Kong on June 23. He cannot leave the
premises because U.S. authorities have annulled his passport, and he does not
have a visa.

Putin told reporters that Snowden had been told he should not 'damage
Russia-American relations' while in Russia. He also suggested that if Russia
does grant him asylum, his stay in the country should not last long.

'He is a young man... We don't quite understand how he made his decision and how
he is going to shape his life in future,' Putin said.

Putin's comments came in contrast to statements from other Russian politicians
backing Snowden. About a dozen human rights activists met the NSA whistleblower
on Friday in Sheremetyevo Airport and later told media that Snowden risks
persecution in the United States.

Leading lawmakers, meanwhile, have urged a welcome for Snowden.

'Giving Snowden asylum will have a positive impact on Russia's image,' Alexei
Pushkov, head of the State Duma International Affairs Committee, wrote on his
Twitter. 'It will show that Russia in becoming involved in defending human
rights on an international level.'

Snowden, meanwhile, 'fears for his life, for his safety,' according to lawyer
Anatoly Kucherena, a member of Russia's Public Chamber advisory body, who helped
Snowden draft his temporary asylum request on Tuesday.

'He is scared that he will be tortured or executed,' Kucherena said in remarks
carried by the Rossiya-24 channel.

The United States has continued to urge that Snowden be extradited, with a U.S.
lawmaker calling on a boycott of the Sochi 2014 Olympics in case Snowden is
allowed to stay in Russia.

"I love the Olympics, but I hate what the Russian government is doing throughout
the world," Senator Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., was quoted by NBC News as saying on
Tuesday. "If they give asylum to a person who I believe has committed treason
against the United States, that's taking it to a new level."

Washington on Tuesday called on Russia to reject Snowden's asylum request and
warned that the case could cause 'long-term problems in U.S.-Russia relations,'
RIA Novosti quoted White House spokesman Jay Carney as saying on Tuesday during
a news briefing.

Putin's comments on Wednesday suggested that Snowden would not likely get formal
political asylum in Russia, but that other options that did not involve
outright, public backing from the Kremlin were open to him.

Russia offers three asylum options - political asylum, refugee status, and
temporary asylum - all of which go through Russia's immigration agency, the
Federal Migration Service, according to RIA Novosti. Political asylum, given to
a person who fears political persecution outside the country, is an issue
ultimately decided by the president, according to the Constitution. Refugee
status is granted by the FMS to persons who fear persecution on grounds of face,
citizenship, race or other grounds. The decision takes up to three months,
though it can be longer in some cases. According to the FMS, about 33 percent of
25,931 refugee status applications between 1997 and 2007 were approved.

Snowden opted for temporary asylum, which is granted for 12 months to those who
have been refused refugee status or cannot be sent out of Russia for
'humanitarian reasons.' A person granted this status is allowed to live in the
country and travel.

Snowden would be able to leave the airport within several days, once he gets a
certificate stating that his request is being considered, Kucherena told Dozhd
TV on Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              126 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden submits request for asylum in Russia

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 750 words


National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden has submitted a request for
temporary asylum in Russia, his lawyer said, claiming he faces persecution from
the US government and could face torture or death.

WikiLeaks, the secret-spilling site that has been advising Snowden, and Russia"s
Federal Migration Service both confirmed the application request. The service is
required by law to consider the application within three months, but could do it
faster.

Snowden, who revealed details of a US intelligence program to monitor Internet
activity, argued in his application that the reason he needs asylum is "he faces
persecution by the US government and he fears for his life and safety, fears
that he could be subjected to torture and capital punishment," lawyer Anatoly
Kucherena said on Rossiya 24 television.

Kucherena told The Associated Press that he met the former NSA systems analyst
in the transit zone of Moscow"s Sheremetyevo airport to give him legal advice
and that Snowden made the request after the meeting.

Snowden has been stuck there since he arrived on a flight from Hong Kong on June
23. He"s had offers of asylum from Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia, but because
his US passport has been revoked, the logistics of reaching whichever country he
chooses are complicated.

He said Friday at an airport meeting with Russian rights activists and public
figures, including Kucherena, that he would seek at least temporary refuge in
Russia until he could fly to one of the Latin American nations that have offered
him asylum.

The temporary asylum would allow Snowden to freely travel and work in Russia,
Kucherena said. He chose to apply for temporary asylum and not political asylum
because the latter takes longer to consider.

Kucherena added that Snowden said he had no immediate plans to leave Russia.
According to Russian law, temporary asylum is provided for a period of one year
and could be extended each year.

Snowden"s stay in Russia has strained already chilly relations between Moscow
and Washington. Granting him asylum would further aggravate tensions with the US
less than two months before Russia"s President Vladimir Putin and President
Barack Obama are to meet in Moscow and again at the G20 summit in St.
Petersburg.

Putin on has described Snowden"s arrival as an unwelcome present foisted on
Russia by the US. He said that Snowden flew to Moscow intending only to transit
to another country, but that the US intimidated other countries into refusing to
accept him, effectively blocking the fugitive from flying further.

Snowden previously had sought Russian asylum, which Putin said would be granted
only if he agreed not to leak more information. Snowden then withdrew the bid,
the Kremlin said.

During Friday"s meeting in the transit zone, Snowden argued that he hadn"t hurt
US interests in the past and has no intention of doing that. Putin did not say
Monday if that would be sufficient grounds for asylum.

Presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Tuesday, according to the Interfax
news agency, that while Snowden voiced his agreement with Putin"s condition, he
has made "no confirmation of that in writing".

Putin noted that Snowden apparently did not want to stay in Russia permanently.
Asked where the former NSA systems analyst could go, Putin responded: "How would
I know? It"s his life, his fate."

Mikhail Fedotov, the head of Russia"s presidential Human Rights Council, said
Tuesday that Snowden should be granted temporary asylum until the UN refugee
agency could ensure his transit to a country that has offered him permanent
asylum.

It was not clear what the likelihood of that was. Dan McNorton, a spokesman for
the UN refugee agency, said Tuesday the agency"s rules prevent him from
commenting directly on any individual"s case.

In Washington, White House spokesman Jay Carney said he was unaware of any
communications between the US and Russian government regarding Snowden on
Tuesday.

"Our position on this remains what it was," he said. Our interest has always
been in seeing him expelled from Russia and returned to the United States."

The Kremlin has been anxious to be rid of Snowden, whom the US wants returned to
face espionage charges.

He is charged with unauthorised communication of national defence information,
willful communication of classified communications intelligence information and
theft of government property. The first two are under the Espionage Act and each
of the three crimes carries a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison on
conviction.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              127 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            July 17, 2013 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Snowden applies for asylum in Russia

BYLINE: Will Englund

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW -              Four days after saying he would seek temporary asylum in
Russia, fugitive NSA contractor Edward Snowden finally did so Tuesday, after
telling a pro-Kremlin lawyer that he fears for his life.

The next move is Russia's. Moscow has sought to keep its distance from Snowden
since he arrived at the transit zone at Sheremetyevo International Airport on
June 23 - unwilling either to expel him to the United States or to let him enter
Russian territory.

But since last week the Kremlin has evidently been preparing the way for an
asylum request, as it became clear that Snowden has few options left.

Anatoly Kucherena, a member of Russia's Public Chamber, a citizens' advisory
council, said he met with Snowden at the airport Tuesday, explained to him the
rules governing temporary asylum, then watched as the American handed his
application to a government official who had been invited to the airport to
receive it.

Appearing on Russian TV, Kucherena said Snowden wrote that his life would be
under threat in the United States and that he fears torture and persecution if
sent home. He has been charged in the United States with violating the Espionage
Act of 1917 for revelations about the National Security Agency's surveillance
programs. Other charges are possible.

Russia's Federal Migration Service has up to three months to consider Snowden's
application, an official told the Itar-Tass news agency. Temporary asylum, by
law, is good for one year, but it can be extended. If it is granted to him,
Snowden would have the right to move freely within Russia.

For the time being, though, he faces a continued stay at Sheremetyevo or a move
to a government shelter for refugees, the head of the Federal Migration
Service's Public Council, Vladimir Volokh, told the Interfax news agency.

Kucherena said Snowden has no specific plans to travel onward, but President
Vladimir Putin said Monday that he doesn't expect the American to stay in Russia
for long, even if granted asylum. Snowden has said that he wants to take up
residence in Venezuela or one of several other Latin American countries.

Tuesday was his 23rd day in the airport transit zone, where he has been stranded
since arriving on a flight from Hong Kong.

Kucherena was among a group of Russian politicians, lawyers and human rights
activists who met with Snowden on Friday at the airport. Tatyana Lokshina of
Human Rights Watch said that she went reluctantly and that the whole episode
appeared to be stage-managed. She said the question of whether Snowden had
discussed what he knows with Russian intelligence agents did not come up.

After the Friday meeting, a parade of Russian politicians urged the government
to grant the asylum request, in what appeared to be a Kremlin-scripted attempt
to make such a move inevitable. Russia has exploited U.S. embarrassment over
Snowden, but comments by Putin and others suggest that the Kremlin expects
diminishing returns from a protracted stay.

However, the U.S. government's efforts to get Snowden back to the United States,
including the application of heavy pressure on potential transit- and
asylum-offering nations, have effectively trapped him in Russia, Putin said.

will.englund@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              128 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             July 16, 2013 Tuesday

Pundits believe Snowden puts Russia in awkward position

LENGTH: 651 words


The presence of ex-CIA operative Edward Snowden is putting Russia in an awkward
position and damaging relations with the USA, Russian experts believe, as
reported by RIA Novosti news agency on 16 July. According to the analysts,
Snowden's departure will allow Moscow to continue building its relations with
the USA.

President Vladimir Putin said on Monday (15 July) that Snowden would leave
Russia as soon as the opportunity arises. Snowden had said previously that he
wanted a temporary asylum in Russia until he could go to Latin America. The
Russian Federal Migration Service has not yet received a formal application from
him.

"Snowden's presence is putting Russia in an awkward position: on the one hand,
this it is not our problem but it turns out that we have to solve it. It all
depends on what Snowden wants, although it seems he is changing his position,"
political analyst Aleksey Mukhin said.

In his view, the presence of the ex-employee of the US intelligence is extremely
inconvenient for Russia. "We have just begun building a certain concept of our
relations with the USA but Snowden has ruined our game," he said.

According to Mukhin, Snowden's departure will allow Moscow to return to
strengthen ties with the USA. The expert believes that if Snowden fulfils all
the conditions of Moscow, he can easily get a temporary political asylum.

Member of the Public Chamber and political scientist Veronika Krasheninnikova
agrees that the situation with Snowden does not help Russia's relations with
America. She believes that Washington's position will remain firm. "Snowden has
been accused of espionage. This means that the USA will seek his return at any
cost," Krasheninnikova said.

The expert said that Russia should wait before taking a final decision, in order
to understand Snowden's position and see whether he accepts Russia's condition
not to harm the USA's interests further.

Snowden's departure would remove another factor of tension in relations with the
USA but so far this seems impossible, head of the State Duma International
Affairs Committee Aleksey Pushkov told RIA Novosti.

"I think the situation is quite clear: Snowden's departure would allow us to
remove unnecessary additional tensions in relations with the USA, as we have
enough tension already. However, judging by Snowden's decision and his recent
statements, his departure is not on the cards yet," Pushkov said.

He added that Snowden cannot fly to Latin America, where he was offered
political asylum, because it was very likely that he will be arrested. This
became evident after the Bolivian president's place had to land in Vienna,
Pushkov said.

When asked whether Russia would profit from Snowden's departure, the head of the
committee said that foreign policy is not always about profits. "Sometimes you
have to take guidance from moral values??, which is what, incidentally, the USA
talks about - that for them human rights and struggle for democracy are
extremely important, and that foreign policy, in their opinion, should take
account of this practice. Russia has followed the democratic path, and it would
be strange if we extradite Snowden, given that our country recognizes democratic
values," the MP said.

If Snowden wants to earn the reputation of a freedom fighter, it would be better
for him to get political asylum in a third country, not in Russia or China, head
of the Federation Council working group on investigation of leakage of Russian
citizens' personal details through the internet company to US special services
Ruslan Gattarov told RIA Novosti.

Gattarov said that Snowden was in a psychologically difficult position, "and his
inconsistent behaviour does not give cause for optimism".

The senator also believes that Putin's statement that Snowden will leave Russia
will have no impact on relations with the USA.

Source: RIA Novosti news agency, Moscow, in Russian 1709, 1731, 1637 gmt 15 Jul
13

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              129 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 16, 2013 Tuesday 08:51 PM GMT+4

Snowden must leave Russia to continue as human rights activist: MP

LENGTH: 323 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 16


- To continue human rights activity, fugitive Edward Snowden will have to leave
Russia and do this in one of the countries that will agree to grant him
permanent political asylum, the chairman of the international affairs committee
at the State Duma lower house of parliament, Alexei Pushkov, told Tass on
Tuesday.

According to him, it is "absolutely impossible" to speculate in the short term
whether the former CIA employee will stay in Russia or will leave it.

"At the present time, Snowden has been stranded in Russia against his own will
and cannot leave our country," he said. "In fact Snowden has no choice," he
stated. Pushkov said leaving Russia is connected with a direct risk for the life
of former CIA employee. "All countries of western democracy have denied Snowden
asylum, and the incident with the forced landing of Bolivian President Evo
Morales's plane in Vienna and its examination demonstrates that planes are not
safe for Snowden either," the deputy said.

At the same time, he stressed that in order to get temporary asylum in Russia,
Snowden will have to meet the demands of Russian President Vladimir Putin - not
to cause further damage to American partners. "Russia and the United States have
an extensive agenda, including the Iranian problem, the Syrian crisis as well as
the North Korean issue," he stressed.

"Russia and the United States must continue cooperation for the sake of security
all over the world," he stated. "That is why the Russian leadership is
interested to see that the incident with Snowden won't tell negatively on
relations with America," he emphasized.

He also said that Snowden had made it clear that he did not want to give up his
human rights activity and would continue exposing "the Big Brother".

"In order to continue such activity he will have to later leave Russia and
engage in it in one of the countries that will agree to grant him permanent
asylum," the head of the Duma committee said.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              132 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 16, 2013 Tuesday

Putin: Snowden a dubious present

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 359 words


MOSCOW (AP) Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday characterized National
Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden"s long stay at a Moscow airport as an
unwelcome present foisted on Russia by the United States.

In comments reported by Russian news agencies during a meeting with students,
Putin noted that Snowden flew to Moscow on June 23 "without invitation,"
intending only to transit to another country.

But Putin says the United States intimidated other countries against accepting
Snowden, effectively blocking him from flying further.

"Such a present to us. Merry Christmas," he was quoted as telling the students
on the Gulf of Finland island of Gogland.

Snowden said last week he would apply for Russian asylum. The status of that
application is unclear.

Russian news agencies said Monday no formal application had been received. The
Federal Migration Service told The Associated Press it had no information on the
matter.

Snowden previously had sought Russian asylum, which Putin said would be granted
only if he agreed not to leak more information. Snowden then withdrew the bid,
Russian officials said.

But in a meeting in the Sheremetyevo airport international transit zone on
Friday, Snowden expressed willingness to make that agreement, participants in
the meeting said.

Putin did not say Monday if that would be sufficient grounds for asylum.
"Judging by the latest statement, he has somehow changed his position, but the
final situation still has not been clarified," he said, according to the
ITAR-Tass news agency.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have offered Snowden asylum, but getting there
from Moscow without passing through U.S. airspace or that of Washington"s allies
would be difficult. The U.S. has annulled his passport.

Putin said Monday that Snowden apparently did not want to stay in Russia
permanently.

But when asked where he would go, Putin said "How would I know? It"s his life,
his fate."

Granting asylum to Snowden could be fraught with peril for Russia, aggravating
tensions with the United States less than two months before Putin and President
Barack Obama are to meet in Moscow and again at the G-20 summit in St.
Petersburg.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              133 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 16, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden submits request for asylum in Russia

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 648 words


MOSCOW (AP) National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden on Tuesday submitted
a request for temporary asylum in Russia, his lawyer said, claiming he faces
persecution from the U.S. government and could face torture or death.

WikiLeaks, the secret-spilling site that has been advising Snowden, and Russia"s
Federal Migration Service both confirmed the application request. The service is
required by law to consider the application within three months, but could do it
faster.

Snowden, who revealed details of a U.S. intelligence program to monitor Internet
activity, argued in his application that the reason he needs asylum is "he faces
persecution by the U.S. government and he fears for his life and safety, fears
that he could be subjected to torture and capital punishment," lawyer Anatoly
Kucherena said on Rossiya 24 television.

Kucherena told The Associated Press that he met the former NSA systems analyst
in the transit zone of Moscow"s Sheremetyevo airport to give him legal advice
and that Snowden made the request after the meeting.

Snowden has been stuck there since he arrived on a flight from Hong Kong on June
23. He"s had offers of asylum from Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia, but because
his U.S. passport has been revoked, the logistics of reaching whichever country
he chooses are complicated.

He said Friday at an airport meeting with Russian rights activists and public
figures, including Kucherena, that he would seek at least temporary refuge in
Russia until he could fly to one of the Latin American nations that have offered
him asylum.

The temporary asylum would allow Snowden to freely travel and work in Russia,
Kucherena said. He chose to apply for temporary asylum and not political asylum
because the latter takes longer to consider.

Kucherena added that Snowden said he had no immediate plans to leave Russia.
According to Russian law, temporary asylum is provided for a period of one year
and could be extended each year.

Snowden"s stay in Russia has strained already chilly relations between Moscow
and Washington. Granting him asylum would further aggravate tensions with the
U.S. less than two months before Russia"s President Vladimir Putin and President
Barack Obama are to meet in Moscow and again at the G-20 summit in St.
Petersburg.

Putin on Monday described Snowden"s arrival as an unwelcome present foisted on
Russia by the U.S. He said that Snowden flew to Moscow intending only to transit
to another country, but that the U.S. intimidated other countries into refusing
to accept him, effectively blocking the fugitive from flying further.

Snowden previously had sought Russian asylum, which Putin said would be granted
only if he agreed not to leak more information. Snowden then withdrew the bid,
the Kremlin said.

During Friday"s meeting in the transit zone, Snowden argued that he hadn"t hurt
U.S. interests in the past and has no intention of doing that. Putin did not say
Monday if that would be sufficient grounds for asylum.

Presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Tuesday, according to the Interfax
news agency, that while Snowden voiced his agreement with Putin"s condition, he
has made "no confirmation of that in writing."

Putin noted that Snowden apparently did not want to stay in Russia permanently.
Asked where the former NSA systems analyst could go, Putin responded: "How would
I know? It"s his life, his fate."

Mikhail Fedotov, the head of Russia"s presidential Human Rights Council, said
Tuesday that Snowden should be granted temporary asylum until the U.N. refugee
agency could ensure his transit to a country that has offered him permanent
asylum. It was not clear what the likelihood of that was.

Dan McNorton, a spokesman for the U.N. refugee agency, said Tuesday the agency"s
rules prevent him from commenting directly on any individual"s case.

____

Raphael Satter in London and John Heilprin in Geneva contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              134 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       July 16, 2013 Tuesday 3:54 PM GMT

Edward Snowden submits request for Russia asylum;
Former US spy agency contractor Edward Snowden has officially applied for
temporary asylum in Russia after three weeks holed up at a Moscow airport trying
to avoid prosecution in the United States on espionage charges.

BYLINE: By Reuters

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 549 words


Mr Snowden is seeking refuge in Latin America after leaking details of US
government surveillance programmes, but has not risked taking any flight that
might be intercepted by the United States since flying in from Hong Kong on June
23.

"He reached the conclusion that he needs to write an application for temporary
asylum (in Russia), and this procedure has just been done," Anatoly Kucherena, a
lawyer who met Mr Snowden on Friday along with human rights activists, told
Reuters.

"For now he is not going to go anywhere. For now he plans to stay in Russia," he
said, adding that if Mr Snowden were granted temporary asylum, he should have
the same rights as other citizens and be free to work and travel in Russia.

The asylum application could end his time in limbo but risks deepening tension
between the United States and Russia, which has refused to expel him to his
homeland for prosecution.

The head of Russia's Federal Migration Service (FMS) confirmed the agency had
received Mr Snowden's application. Anti-secrecy group Wikileaks, which has been
helping Snowden, said on Twitter that he had applied for "a temporary protection
visa".

Mr Snowden, 30, is trapped in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport,
an area between the runway and passport control which Russia regards as neutral
territory.

He said on Friday he would seek refuge in Russia only until he can travel to one
of the three Latin American countries ready to give him political asylum -
Bolivia, Venezuela and Nicaragua.

He said the United States and its allies were preventing him from reaching those
countries. Washington has revoked Mr Snowden's passport and urged other nations
not to help him reach an asylum destination.

Mr Kucherena said he expected a decision on Mr Snowden's asylum request "soon",
though the Federal Migration Service has up to three months to decide on the
application.

The process for seeking temporary asylum is different from that for political
asylum, which Mr Kucherena said would require a decree from President Vladimir
Putin.

Mr Putin has rejected repeated US calls to send Snowden to the United States,
but has said he does not want the fugitive to harm already strained relations
with Washington.

Mr Snowden is useful as a propaganda tool for Putin, who accuses the US
government of preaching to the world about rights and freedoms it does not
uphold at home.

But Mr Putin has invited President Barack Obama for a summit in Moscow in
September and both countries have signalled they want to improve ties.

Mr Putin has said twice that Mr Snowden must stop all activities "aimed at
harming our American partners" if he wants political asylum in Russia, but he
has not made clear whether the condition applies to temporary asylum as well.

Temporary asylum is granted by the FMS, but Mr Putin would be expected to make
the final decision himself, even though he has tried to distance himself from
Snowden's predicament.

Mr Putin said on Monday he hoped Mr Snowden would leave as soon as he could, but
left the door open for granting him asylum, saying there were signs the American
fugitive was moving towards meeting the conditions he has set.

Temporary asylum can be granted for up to a year, with the possibility of
extension.

Edited by Hannah Strange

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              135 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                              July 15, 2013 Monday

Russia says Snowden hasn't asked for asylum;
State contact with fugitive denied despite apparent role in airport meeting

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

The statement seems to signal that Russia's political position vis-à-vis Edward
J. Snowden has been complicated further by his now publicly professed desire to
stay there.

FULL TEXT

Senior Kremlin officials said over the weekend that Russia's Federal Migration
Service had not yet received a formal appeal for asylum from Edward J. Snowden.
And the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, insisted that the government
had had no contact with him - a curious statement given the government's clear
role in arranging a meeting at Sheremetyevo Airport here in Moscow on Friday
between Mr. Snowden and lawyers and human rights advocates.

At the meeting on Friday, Mr. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor who is
on the run from the U.S. authorities and faces criminal charges of disclosing
classified information, told the lawyers and rights advocates that he was
requesting shelter in Russia because the United States and its allies were
illegally preventing him from traveling to Latin America, where three countries
have expressed a willingness to take him in.

The verbal maneuvering seems to signal that Russia's political position
vis-à-vis Mr. Snowden has been complicated further by his now publicly professed
desire to stay here. Although President Vladimir V. Putin has insisted that Mr.
Snowden must stop harming U.S. interests, the Obama administration has made it
clear that it believes those interests are being harmed so long as Mr. Snowden
is on the loose.

Mr. Snowden on Friday appealed to the human rights advocates to intervene on his
behalf with the Russian government, though it is unclear how influential they
can be, given that at least two of the groups represented - Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch - have had their Moscow offices raided by
the authorities in recent months, and some of their local representatives have
faced personal threats apparently aimed at curtailing their work.

''I ask for your assistance in requesting guarantees of safe passage from the
relevant nations in securing my travel to Latin America, as well as requesting
asylum in Russia until such time as these states accede to law and my legal
travel is permitted,'' Mr. Snowden said Friday in his remarks, according to a
text released by WikiLeaks, the antisecrecy group that is helping him. ''I will
be submitting my request to Russia today, and hope it will be accepted
favorably,'' he said.

On Saturday, however, the director of Russia's Federal Migration Service,
Konstantin Romodanovsky, told the Interfax news agency that no request had been
received. ''At the present time, there have been no applications from Snowden,''
he said. ''If we receive an application, it will be considered in due process of
law.''

Mr. Lavrov, who was in Cholpon-Ata, Kyrgyzstan, for a meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, told reporters, ''To be granted political asylum,
Russian law presumes a certain procedure, and the first step is the filing of an
application with the Federal Migration Service.''

Mr. Lavrov added, ''We have no contacts with Snowden,'' and he said the issues
raised by Mr. Snowden during the meeting at the airport were ''extensively
covered by the media, and I learned about them just as anybody else.''

Since Mr. Snowden's arrival in Moscow from Hong Kong on June 23, apparently with
advance clearance from the Kremlin, Russian officials have engaged in an
elaborate theatrical exercise, at times insisting that they are following all
legal technicalities while simultaneously making it clear that he is under
official protection. There is nothing remotely normal about his situation - a
purgatory in the airport transit zone with no clear end in sight.

Mr. Putin most recently had seemed to urge Mr. Snowden to stop releasing
information about the classified U.S. surveillance programs. ''He must stop his
work aimed at harming our American partners, as strange as that sounds coming
from my lips,'' he said - a condition that the presidential spokesman Dmitri S.
Peskov reiterated on Friday and that Mr. Snowden appeared willing to accept.

But Mr. Putin had also indicated some desire to be rid of Mr. Snowden, calling
him a free man and saying, ''The sooner he chooses his final destination, the
better it will be both for us and for him.''

Mr. Lavrov's assertion that the government has not had contact with Mr. Snowden
was notable given that numerous government agencies appeared to have had a role
in the meeting Friday, including the Federal Customs Service and the airport
administration.

Several of the participants in the meeting are also close to the Kremlin,
including Russia's human rights ombudsman, Vladimir P. Lukin, and Vyacheslav A.
Nikonov, a member of the Duma, the lower house of Parliament.

People invited to attend the meeting received instructions from airport
management, and reaching the transit zone required special passes to get through
the customs control zone. At one point, a bus brought the lawyers and rights
advocates from one part of the terminal to another, and several said they met
Mr. Snowden in a room with a door marked ''Staff only.''

Mr. Snowden, in the meeting, said that the official offer of asylum that he had
received from Venezuela should be regarded as giving him clear protection under
international law and that he should be permitted to travel. He accused the
United States and its allies of acting illegally in blocking him from traveling
there.

The Russian government has itself shown little regard for the international
asylum process when it has pursued fugitives abroad. In a case last autumn, a
political opposition leader wanted by the Russian authorities who fled to Kiev
and requested asylum was kidnapped when he stepped outside of his lawyer's
office for lunch. He was put in a van by masked men and driven back to Moscow,
where federal officials insisted he had surrendered.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              136 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 15, 2013 Monday 08:16 PM GMT+4

Snowden to leave Russia at first opportunity but situation unclear -- Putin

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: GOGLAND ISLAND Leningrad Region, July 15


- Former U.S. National Security Agency agent Edward Snowden will leave Russia as
soon as such an opportunity presents itself but the situation remains unclear,
President Vladimir Putin said on Monday, July 15.

"It is in limbo right now but as soon as he has an opportunity to move elsewhere
he will certainly do so," Putin said at a meeting with students. "He knows the
terms of granting political asylum and, judging from his latest statements, he
is changing his position, but the situation is not completely clear yet."

The United States has basically blocked Snowden in Russia by not letting other
countries allow him to travel through their territories, the president said. "He
arrived in our territory without invitation. He was travelling to other
countries as a transit passenger. But as soon as he was airborne and this became
known, our American partners had basically blocked his further movement," Putin
said.

"They also frightened all other countries and no one wants to receive him. So
they have basically blocked him on our territory," he added.

When asked about Snowden's further fate, Putin replied: "How should I know? It's
his life and his fate."

"After all he wants to move to a place of permanent residence and wants to live
permanently elsewhere," the president said.

He recalled that Snowden had been offered to stay in Russia on condition that he
stop he political activities. "We have certain relations with the United States
and we do not want your activities to damage our relations with the U.S. He said
now. You are laughing but I am being serious. He said he wanted to continue his
activities, he wanted to fight for human rights and he thought that the U.S.
violated certain norms of international law and interfered in private live, and
his goal was to fight that. We said: do so but without us. We have other things
to fight," Putin said.

Commenting on the issue of Snowden's possible extradition to the United States,
Putin said earlier: "Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the sooner he chooses his
final destination the better it is for us and for him. I hope it will not affect
the business-like character of our relations with the U.S. and I hope that our
partners will understand that."

Snowden is staying in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, and,
technically, is not on Russian territory. He is believed to be waiting to fly to
an unspecified location, most likely in South America, wherever he is granted
political asylum.

A Russian expert believes that Venezuela would be the best asylum for Snowden.

"Asylum for Snowden in Venezuela would be the best solution," Pushkov said
earlier. "That country is in acute conflict with the United States and this
can't make things worse."

"In fact, he can't live at Sheremetyevo [Airport in Moscow]," he added.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro offered "humanitarian asylum" to Snowden in
order "to protect him from prosecution of the world's most powerful
governments."

Maduro made the offer on Friday, July 5, addressing a military parade marking
the 202nd anniversary of the country's independence.

In his opinion, Snowden "did nothing but say the truth" and got prosecuted "by
the most powerful empire in the world".

Meanwhile, The Nicaraguan diplomatic mission in Russia has sent Snowden's letter
to the Nicaraguan president with a request for political asylum, Nicaraguan
Ambassador in Moscow Luis Alberto Molina told ITAR-TASS.

Bolivian President Evo Morales said on July 6 that he was ready to grant
political asylum to Snowden for "humanitarian reasons".

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry called for "calm and reasonableness" in
dealing with the Snowden issue.

"We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice. We're not looking for a confrontation. We are not ordering anybody,"
Kerry said.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              137 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 15, 2013 Monday 07:03 PM GMT+4

Snowden will never get Nobel peace prize -- MP

LENGTH: 606 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 15


- The United States will never allow the Nobel Peace Prize to be awarded to
former NSA agent Edward Snowden, State Duma Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman
Alexei Pushkov said.

Experience shows that the Nobel Committee's decisions always fit into the
traditional political considerations of the Euro-Atlantic Community. "When it
comes to issues like the Peace Prize, political considerations prevail,
primarily those of the United States and West European states," the MP told
ITAR-TASS on Monday, July 15.

He noted that the American administration has clearly stated its position on
Snowden - he has committed a criminal offence and must go on trial, and his
activities have nothing to do with human rights or democracy.

Pushkov believes that European countries will support the U.S. "Although they
may bicker with Washington over the revelations made by Snowden, they have
clearly come to the consensus that the fugitive CIA agent must be found and
handed over to the U.S.," Pushkov said.

"The [Bolivian President Evo] Morales story was quite indicative in this
respect," he added.

In addition, the Nobel Peace Prize "has a conspicuously political nature", the
MP noted.

"In 2009, it was awarded to Barack Obama, who had just been elected U.S.
president and had done nothing for peace yet," he said.

The fact that last year's prize went to a Chinese dissident who had been jailed
in China "does not mean that the Nobel Committee may make a similar decision
with regard to the Western dissident."

At the same time, Pushkov admitted that the very fact that Snowden has been
nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize suggests that many people in the West view
him as a fighter for democracy.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry called for "calm and reasonableness" in
dealing with the Snowden issue.

"We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice. We're not looking for a confrontation. We are not ordering anybody,"
Kerry said.

Commenting on the issue of Snowden's possible extradition to the United States,
President Vladimir Putin said "Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the sooner he
chooses his final destination the better it is for us and for him. I hope it
will not affect the business-like character of our relations with the U.S. and I
hope that our partners will understand that."

Snowden is staying in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, and,
technically, is not on Russian territory. He is believed to be waiting to fly to
an unspecified location, most likely in South America, wherever he is granted
political asylum.

A Russian expert believes that Venezuela would be the best asylum for Snowden.

"Asylum for Snowden in Venezuela would be the best solution," Pushkov said
earlier. "That country is in acute conflict with the United States and this
can't make things worse."

"In fact, he can't live at Sheremetyevo [Airport in Moscow]," he added.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro offered "humanitarian asylum" to Snowden in
order "to protect him from prosecution of the world's most powerful
governments."

Maduro made the offer on Friday, July 5, addressing a military parade marking
the 202nd anniversary of the country's independence.

In his opinion, Snowden "did nothing but say the truth" and got prosecuted "by
the most powerful empire in the world".

Meanwhile, The Nicaraguan diplomatic mission in Russia has sent Snowden's letter
to the Nicaraguan president with a request for political asylum, Nicaraguan
Ambassador in Moscow Luis Alberto Molina told ITAR-TASS.

Bolivian President Evo Morales said on July 6 that he was ready to grant
political asylum to Snowden for "humanitarian reasons".

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              138 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 15, 2013 Monday

The Kremlin's cunning Snowden plan

SECTION: POTEMKIN TALES

LENGTH: 696 words


On Friday, NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden  invited about a dozen Russian
rights activists to the transit zone of  Sheremetyevo Airport, where he's been
holed up for three weeks. The announcement  took about 200 journalists on a wild
goose chase, and a weekend later, there's  still a lot of head-scratching going
on.

"It was a very strange event," Human Rights  Watch director Tatyana Lokshina
told me on Monday. "I don't even know whether it  was [Snowden's] idea or not.
It was like a press conference, but there were no  journalists."

The gist of what happened at the meeting -  segments of which have been
paraphrased by several participants whose  testimonies are at times conflicting
- is that Snowden said he wanted to apply  for temporary political asylum in
Russia.

Snowden already applied for Russian asylum -  at least, his request was
confirmed as having been received on July 1 by a  representative at the Foreign
Ministry's consular desk at Sheremetyevo Airport. It was confirmed, too, by
WikiLeaks, the whistleblowing organization that supports him.

Practically at the same time as his asylum  request hit the news waves and
threatened to further jeopardize already tense  relations between Russia and
the United  States, President Vladimir Putin came out with  a very enigmatic
statement. Sure, Snowden can stay in Russia,  he said on July 1, but on "one
condition: he must stop his work aimed at harming  our American partners."

Putin himself acknowledged the strangeness of  such a comment. On the surface,
it would appear that Snowden is "a gift" for  Russia, a stinging  demonstration
that despite Americans' criticism of Russia's human rights record at home, here
was an  American whistleblower asking for asylum in Russia.  Leaders of Latin
American countries where Snowden applied for asylum used the  same rhetoric. Why
Putin was suddenly expressing loyalty to his "American  partners" was a mystery.

The following day, Putin's spokesman said  that Snowden didn't want Russian
asylum after all, in light of the president's  provision. There was neither
confirmation nor denial from either Snowden or  WikiLeaks.

What happened since then? Was there some sort  of cunning plan hatched in the
Kremlin regarding Snowden? If there was, it has  likely gone the way of cunning
plans on  "Blackadder."

As analyst Dmitry Trenin wrote in Foreign  Policy magazine last week, Russia's
designs on Snowden, whatever  they were, had gone awry.

Fast-forward to last Friday, when Snowden  called the meeting at Sheremetyevo
Airport.

By some accounts, he said he wanted rights  activists to support him with his
asylum request before Russian authorities. But  why, if Putin had already said
under which conditions Snowden could  stay?

Lokshina had a different angle on the Friday  meeting. "The first and main thing
that he asked is for [us] to call on the  United  States to stop limiting his
freedom of  movement," she told me. "Where his asylum request is concerned, that
was an  answer to a question on whether he wanted us to support his request
before the  government. He said yes, that would be important."

According to Olga Kostina, a member of  Russia's Public Chamber advisory body
who was also at the meeting, the main purpose of the meeting was getting
Snowden's position across to the international community by utilizing rights
activists who would then talk to the media.

"He understood that after the meeting we  would be talking to a lot of foreign
media," Kostina said on  Monday.

Snowden, it appears, wasn't so much asking  rights activists for specific help
as using them as his spokespeople. Whatever  the Kremlin does or doesn't have up
its sleeve, whether it facilitated this  meeting or not (and if it did, then
probably not directly), this is an  incredibly convenient development.

Russian rights activists, often pictured  criticizing abuses back home, were
standing up in the defense of an American  whistleblower.

Now, if the Kremlin does give Snowden asylum,  it has a foolproof excuse: the
human rights community asked it.

Anna  Arutunyan is an editor and  correspondent at themoscownews.com

Edward Snowden asks for temporary political asylum in Russia

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              148 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 15, 2013 Monday

The Kremlin's cunning Snowden plan

SECTION: POTEMKIN TALES

LENGTH: 696 words


On Friday, NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden  invited about a dozen Russian
rights activists to the transit zone of  Sheremetyevo Airport, where he's been
holed up for three weeks. The announcement  took about 200 journalists on a wild
goose chase, and a weekend later, there's  still a lot of head-scratching going
on.

"It was a very strange event," Human Rights  Watch director Tatyana Lokshina
told me on Monday. "I don't even know whether it  was [Snowden's] idea or not.
It was like a press conference, but there were no  journalists."

The gist of what happened at the meeting -  segments of which have been
paraphrased by several participants whose  testimonies are at times conflicting
- is that Snowden said he wanted to apply  for temporary political asylum in
Russia.

Snowden already applied for Russian asylum -  at least, his request was
confirmed as having been received on July 1 by a  representative at the Foreign
Ministry's consular desk at Sheremetyevo Airport. It was confirmed, too, by
WikiLeaks, the whistleblowing organization that supports him.

Practically at the same time as his asylum  request hit the news waves and
threatened to further jeopardize already tense  relations between Russia and
the United  States, President Vladimir Putin came out with  a very enigmatic
statement. Sure, Snowden can stay in Russia,  he said on July 1, but on "one
condition: he must stop his work aimed at harming  our American partners."

Putin himself acknowledged the strangeness of  such a comment. On the surface,
it would appear that Snowden is "a gift" for  Russia, a stinging  demonstration
that despite Americans' criticism of Russia's human rights record at home, here
was an  American whistleblower asking for asylum in Russia.  Leaders of Latin
American countries where Snowden applied for asylum used the  same rhetoric. Why
Putin was suddenly expressing loyalty to his "American  partners" was a mystery.

The following day, Putin's spokesman said  that Snowden didn't want Russian
asylum after all, in light of the president's  provision. There was neither
confirmation nor denial from either Snowden or  WikiLeaks.

What happened since then? Was there some sort  of cunning plan hatched in the
Kremlin regarding Snowden? If there was, it has  likely gone the way of cunning
plans on  "Blackadder."

As analyst Dmitry Trenin wrote in Foreign  Policy magazine last week, Russia's
designs on Snowden, whatever  they were, had gone awry.

Fast-forward to last Friday, when Snowden  called the meeting at Sheremetyevo
Airport.

By some accounts, he said he wanted rights  activists to support him with his
asylum request before Russian authorities. But  why, if Putin had already said
under which conditions Snowden could  stay?

Lokshina had a different angle on the Friday  meeting. "The first and main thing
that he asked is for [us] to call on the  United  States to stop limiting his
freedom of  movement," she told me. "Where his asylum request is concerned, that
was an  answer to a question on whether he wanted us to support his request
before the  government. He said yes, that would be important."

According to Olga Kostina, a member of  Russia's Public Chamber advisory body
who was also at the meeting, the main purpose of the meeting was getting
Snowden's position across to the international community by utilizing rights
activists who would then talk to the media.

"He understood that after the meeting we  would be talking to a lot of foreign
media," Kostina said on  Monday.

Snowden, it appears, wasn't so much asking  rights activists for specific help
as using them as his spokespeople. Whatever  the Kremlin does or doesn't have up
its sleeve, whether it facilitated this  meeting or not (and if it did, then
probably not directly), this is an  incredibly convenient development.

Russian rights activists, often pictured  criticizing abuses back home, were
standing up in the defense of an American  whistleblower.

Now, if the Kremlin does give Snowden asylum,  it has a foolproof excuse: the
human rights community asked it.

Anna  Arutunyan is an editor and  correspondent at themoscownews.com

Edward Snowden asks for temporary political asylum in Russia

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              149 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                              July 15, 2013 Monday

Journalist: Snowden held back most sensitive data 'has information to cause more
damage'

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 816 words


Agence France-Presse

MOSCOW

Edward Snowden possesses data that could prove far more "damaging" to the US
government but the fugitive leaker has chosen not to release them, said a
journalist who first broke the story.

Glenn Greenwald told Argentina's La Nacion paper that Snowden, who is currently
stranded in Moscow, had only sought to alert people that information they
thought was private was being exploited by US intelligence agencies.

"Snowden has enough information to cause more damage to the US government in a
minute alone than anyone else has ever had in the history of the United States,"
he told the paper in an interview published on Saturday.

"But that's not his goal," said Greenwald, who published a series of stories in
Britain's Guardian newspaper based on top-secret documents about sweeping US
surveillance programmes that were leaked by Snowden.

His comments came as Russia waited yesterday for a promised request for asylum
from Snowden.

The United States wants the former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor
returned to them to face trial over the leaks. Moscow has so far rejected that
demand.

Russia on Saturday awaited a promised request for asylum from fugitive US
intelligence leaker Edward Snowden that risks straining relations with
Washington after he broke three weeks of silence to announce he wanted sanctuary
in the country.

Snowden on Friday dramatically summoned activists to the transit zone of
Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport where he has been marooned without a valid
passport for the last three weeks after arriving on a flight from Hong Kong.

But a full day after Snowden told the activists he would immediately request
asylum from Russia, officials in Moscow said they were not aware of any such
approach by the former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor.

Some close allies of President Vladimir Putin rushed to back the idea of
according asylum but the Kremlin also appears careful not to over-aggravate
already tense relations with the United States.

Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov appeared to distance himself from the
controversy, insisting the government was "not contacting" Snowden and that he
had found out about the details of his meeting with activists through the media.

"Russian laws specify a procedure for obtaining political asylum and the first
step is approaching the Federal Migration Service (FMS)," he added, quoted by
Russian news agencies.

The United States has told Moscow Snowden must be extradited back home to face
justice over his leaking of sensational details about US surveillance
activities, a demand Putin has rejected.

The White House after Snowden's meeting warned Russia not to grant him a
"propaganda platform" and scolded Moscow for allowing the fugitive to hold court
with a select group of activists. Snowden, 30, making his first publicised
appearance since arriving in Moscow, told the activists he wanted to claim
asylum in Russia until he could safely travel to Latin America for a permanent
sanctuary.

He had said he would make the asylum request on Friday evening. But no Russian
official on Saturday could confirm that such an application had been made.

The head of Russia's Federal Migration Service (FMS) Konstantin Romodanovsky
said Saturday that "there is for the moment no application from E. Snowden". If
one was made, it would be examined "according to normal legal procedures", he
added.

"For the moment, we do not know anything" about an asylum application, Kremlin
spokesman Dmitry Peskov told the Interfax news agency.

Curiously, Snowden had last week withdrawn a request for asylum in Russia after
Putin insisted he could stay only if he stopped releasing information that
harmed the United States.

At the meeting with activists, Snowden vowed he did not want to harm the United
States but it was not clear whether this meant he was prepared to stop leaking
intelligence in order to stay in Russia.

In initial hints that Snowden's new application may be viewed positively, the
speaker of Russia's lower house of parliament Sergei Naryshkin and the upper
house speaker Valentina Matviyenko both swiftly said Friday his request should
be accepted.

The leftist governments in Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have all offered
Snowden asylum, but Snowden said that Western governments would prevent him from
travelling to the region. The US has already rebuked China for allowing Snowden
to leave for Russia from Hong Kong and Moscow would risk incurring the wrath of
Washington should it dare offer him asylum.

A summit of the Latin American Mercosur trade bloc issued a statement Friday
reaffirming the right to asylum and rejecting "any attempt at pressure,
harassment or criminalisation by a state or third parties".

The bloc, meeting in the Uruguayan capital Montevideo, denounced four European
countries who denied airspace to a plane carrying Bolivian President Evo Morales
back from Moscow earlier this month.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              150 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              July 15, 2013 Monday
                                 CHASE EDITION

NSA leaker says he has 'no regrets';
Snowden seeks asylum in Russia until able to travel

BYLINE: Anna Arutunyan, and Doug Stanglin, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 458 words


Sunday marked three weeks that NSA leaker Edward Snowden has been marooned at a
Moscow airport as he seeks temporary asylum in Russia.

Snowden, 30, a former National Security Agency contractor, said he submitted his
request to Russia on Friday, and Russia had not responded publicly by Sunday.

Snowden said he has no regrets over leaking details about U.S. electronic spying
networks and is seeking temporary asylum in Russia until he can reach one of the
Latin American countries that offered to take him in.

"That moral decision to tell the public about spying that affects all of us has
been costly, but it was the right thing to do and I have no regrets," he said at
Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, where he has taken refuge since June 23.

Meanwhile, Glenn Greenwald, the columnist with The Guardian newspaper who first
published the leaked documents, said Sunday that Snowden has sensitive
"blueprints" detailing how the NSA operates that would allow someone who read
them to evade or duplicate NSA surveillance.

"In order to take documents with him that proved that what he was saying was
true he had to take ones that included very sensitive, detailed blueprints of
how the NSA does what they do," Greenwald told the Associated Press in an
interview in Brazil, where he lives.

Greenwald said Snowden has insisted the information from those documents not be
made public.

Snowden, whose U.S. passport has been revoked, said he has formally accepted an
offer of asylum from Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro, as well as all others
who have expressed support "and all others that may be offered in the future."
He said he would ask Russia for permission to remain in the country until he
resolves his travel problems.

Snowden had made a previous bid for Russian asylum, but President Vladimir Putin
said Snowden would have to agree to stop further leaks about American
intelligence service activities before it would be considered. Dmitry Peskov,
spokesman for Putin, told Russian news agencies that Putin would continue to
insist that Snowden stop such leaks.

Granting asylum to Snowden would add significant stress to already-troubled
Washington-Moscow relations. Putin and President Obama are to hold a summit in
Moscow in September, right before both take part in the Group of 20 summit in
St. Petersburg, and the Snowden issue could overshadow both gatherings.

Obama and Putin discussed Snowden, among other issues, during a telephone call
Friday, the White House said in a terse statement.

Before the call, White House spokesman Jay Carney said, "Providing a propaganda
platform for Mr. Snowden runs counter to the Russian government's previous
declarations of Russia's neutrality."

Stanglin reported from McLean,Va.

Contributing: The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              151 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 14, 2013 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

Russia says Snowden hasn't made a request for asylum;
An official says, 'We are not in contact.' A lawyer says he's ready to assist
the former NSA contractor.

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


As of Saturday, Edward Snowden had not yet formally applied for political asylum
in Russia, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said.

"We are not in contact with Edward Snowden," Lavrov said in televised remarks
during a visit to Kyrgyzstan. "Russian legislation provides for a certain
procedure, the first step in which is an official application to the Federal
Migration Service."

On Friday, Snowden, the former U.S. National Security Agency contractor who
revealed Washington's secret efforts to track international communications,
summoned Russian human rights activists and lawyers to Sheremetyevo
International Airport here to give him assistance in gaining asylum in Russia.

The White House reacted strongly to the meeting, accusing the Russian government
of providing Snowden with a platform to spew propaganda despite its previous
declarations of neutrality.

Snowden cannot be expected to file an official request over the weekend, said
Russian lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, who was among those who met with him Friday.
Kucherena confirmed that he was ready to assist Snowden with the papers.

"I am waiting for him to send me some information via email so that we could
start working on his request," Kucherena said in an interview with The Times.
"Besides being in a very difficult situation without a valid passport and a
possibility to even get out of the airport transit zone, Snowden knows nothing
about Russian laws and should be guided on how to officially apply for asylum."

"I care nothing about politics, but I know that I must help this man," Kucherena
said. The procedure may take a while, and the final say will belong to President
Vladimir Putin, the lawyer said.

If Russia grants asylum, Kucherena said, Snowden could apply for citizenship in
five years. According to Russian officials, Snowden withdrew an earlier request
for asylum because of Putin's demand that he stop leaking information harmful to
the United States.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have indicated that they would consider
granting an asylum request.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: RUSSIAN LAWYERS Genry Reznik, left, and Anatoly Kucherena speak
with journalists at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport on Friday after
meeting with U.S. fugitive Edward Snowden.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Kirill Kudryavtsev
AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              153 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 14, 2013 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

Russia says Snowden hasn't submitted a request for asylum

BYLINE: Steve Gutterman

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 430 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - Russia kept U.S. leaker Edward Snowden at arm's length on Saturday,
saying it had not been in touch with the fugitive American and had not yet
received a formal request for political asylum.

Remarks by Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov signaled that Russia is weighing its
options after Snowden, who is stranded at a Moscow airport, broke three weeks of
silence and asked for refuge in Russia until he can secure safe passage to Latin
America, where he has been offered asylum by three nations.

Washington officials urged Moscow to return Snowden to the United States, where
he is wanted on espionage charges after revealing details of secret surveillance
programs, and President Obama reportedly spoke by phone with Russian President
Vladimir Putin.

Snowden's leaks about U.S. spying methods, including eavesdropping on global
e-mail traffic, have upset U.S. friends and foes alike. Stuck at Sheremetyevo
airport with his passport revoked, the former National Security Agency
contractor has become an irritant in relations between the United States and
Russia.

"We are not in contact with Snowden," Russian news agencies quoted Lavrov as
saying in Kyrgyzstan, where he was attending a meeting of foreign ministers.

Lavrov said he had learned of Snowden's meeting Friday with Russian human rights
activists and public figures at the airport from the news media, "just like
everyone else."

Lavrov said that under Russian law, asylum seekers must first make an official
appeal to the Federal Migration Service. But its director, Konstantin
Romodanovsky, said Saturday that the agency had not received such a request from
Snowden.

Snowden is useful as a propaganda tool for Putin, who accuses the U.S.
government of preaching to the world about rights and freedoms that it does not
uphold at home. But his presence on Russia's doorstep is a double-edged sword.

Putin has invited Obama for a bilateral summit in Moscow in September, and
asylum for Snowden could jeopardize that, even though both countries have
signaled that they want to improve ties that have been strained in Putin's third
presidential term.

And while pro-Kremlin politicians have cast Snowden, 30, as a rights defender,
former KGB officer Putin said last month that the surveillance methods he
revealed were largely justified if applied lawfully.

Putin has said twice that Snowden should choose a final destination and go
there, and on July 2 he said Russia could take Snowden in only if he stopped
activities "aimed at harming our American partners."

Putin's spokesman said Friday that the condition still stood.

- Reuters

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              154 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Let me stay in Russia, pleads whistleblower

BYLINE: Tom Parfitt; Damien McElroy

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1231 words


THE AMERICAN whistleblower Edward Snowden yesterday sought asylum in Russia, in
his first encounter with the outside world since becoming marooned at a Moscow
airport three weeks ago during a globe-trotting flight from charges of
espionage.

His move prompted the White House to say that President Barack Obama would call
Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, and presumably demand the return of the
30-year-old former analyst at the National Security Agency, who provoked one of
the biggest intelligence leaks in American history.

Jay Carney, the White House spokesman, warned Russia against allowing Mr Snowden
a "propaganda platform" by letting him stay in the country.

He said such a move would "run counter" to Moscow's assurances that it did not
want the Snowden affair to harm USRussia relations. He renewed Washington's call
for Russia to expel Mr Snowden so that he could be returned to American soil to
face trial for leaking US national security secrets.

There were chaotic scenes after Mr Snowden invited human rights groups and
senior Russian officials to meet him at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, where he
has been trapped in a closed area of the transit zone since he flew in from Hong
Kong on June 23 with the US authorities closing in.

At least 200 television cameramen and reporters stampeded through Terminal F to
see a group of about 10 human rights activits, lawyers and at least one Russian
MP ushered through a door marked "staff only". The guests were transported by
bus to a meeting with Mr Snowden, who was accompanied by the British WikiLeaks
activist Sarah Harrison, who has been with him for several weeks.

"Hello. My name is Ed Snowden. A little over one month ago, I had family, a home
in paradise, and I lived in great comfort," said the fugitive, who fled his job
and girlfriend in Hawaii to Hong Kong, where he revealed secrets about US
surveillance operations.

He declared that he had no regrets about exposing details of "massive, pervasive
surveillance" by US intelligence agencies, but that he was forced to apply for
"temporary political asylum" in Russia while he secured an onward route to Latin
America, where he hoped to seek final refuge, despite having no passport.

"Individual citizens have the duty to violate domestic laws to prevent crimes
against peace and humanity from occurring," Mr Snowden said. "Accordingly, I did
what I believed right and began a campaign to correct this wrongdoing. I did not
seek to enrich myself. I did not seek to sell US secrets. I did not partner with
any foreign government to guarantee my safety. Instead, I took what I knew to
the public, so what affects all of us can be discussed by all of us in the light
of day, and I asked the world for justice."

Mr Snowden's request for refuge gained immediate support from some senior
Russian political figures - including Sergei Naryshkin, the speaker of the lower
house of parliament - and the Kremlin indicated that his application would be
reviewed.

A shaky video of the airport meeting showed the 30-year-old former National
Security Agency contractor leaker smiling broadly and joking "I've heard this
many times" as a tannoy flight announcement interrupted his speech.

Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch's Moscow bureau, who was among those who
attended the 45-minute meeting, told The Daily Telegraph afterwards that the
American appeared in good health. "He said that he was about to file a formal
asylum claim with the Russian authorities," she said.

Mr Snowden was asked whether he would meet Mr Putin's condition for staying in
Russia - that he did nothing to "harm our American partners" - which was issued
when the American made an earlier, less public application.

"Snowden said that he did not find the condition problematic because Putin said
he would be ready to give him asylum in the case that he stopped damaging
Russia's partners," said Ms Lokshina. "And in his [Snowden's] perception,
whatever he has done and is planning to do does not harm the United States. He
stressed that he did not want to do harm, that he wanted the US to succeed and
do well."

Others who attended said Mr Snowden had made it clear that his eventual
destination was Latin America, where Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia have
offered him asylum - and asked his guests to help to press the US and European
states not to impede his travel there.

Washington has urged countries whose airspace Mr Snowden might have to cross not
to offer any assistance, as well as his possible final destinations.

Ms Lokshina revealed that before the meeting she had received a phone call from
a representative of the US embassy in Moscow, asking her to pass on a message
from Michael McFaul, the US ambassador to Moscow, to Mr Snowden that "he's no
whistleblower, that he broke the law and should be held accountable".

When he heard the message, Mr Snowden responded that he was not surprised, and
that he "definitely viewed himself as a whistleblower who had revealed
information of very significant public interest".

Q&A What are the options for a fugitive from US justice holed up in a Moscow
airport?

What are Edward Snowden's chances of finding a lasting refuge from US justice?

Mr Snowden has one overriding objective - to ensure that he never faces a US
court on charges of betraying his homeland. However, he faces a determined Obama
administration.

There are legal experts who believe Mr Snowden has a strong case under
international law to claim asylum as he engaged in a form of "protected speech",
exposing unlawful behaviour by his government.

What is temporary asylum? Is it even a concept that can protect him?

By claiming that he wants only a provisional form of asylum in Russia, Mr
Snowden is attempting to preserve his preferred option of moving to South
America.

But in theory, refugee status should be recognised and granted by the first
country that the applicant reaches. However, the political dividing lines that
have been drawn up around Snowden could allow him to maintain the other offers
from Latin states.

Where will Mr Snowden live in the immediate future?

Launching some form of asylum process in Russia would ensure that he could leave
the airport and move into accommodation until he can be sure of reaching his
final destination. But President Vladimir Putin has sounded cool on Mr Snowden's
pleas for refuge - saying that he could not "harm our American partners" while
in Russia - so his precise next whereabouts remain uncertain.

Does his asylum bid mean the flow of revelations will now dry up?

Mr Snowden has said that he does not want to harm America, but he has not given
a blanket assurance that he will drop his whistleblowing activities. In any case
the choice may no longer rest with him. Glenn Greenwald, the US journalist who
collaborated with Mr Snowden, has the files at his home and this week said that
it would take him "months" to work through the data for more leaks.

How can Mr Snowden reach his preferred place of exile in South America?

In practice, he would have to find a direct flight route that neither crosses
the airspace of the long list of US allies or encroaches on US airspace. If he
does not mind spending time in a European prison, it may be that he chooses to
fight extradition in the EU courts once his refugee status is established.
Victory in court would mean he could then travel on to South America.

Damien McElroy

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Snowden flanked by human rights workers at the airport in Moscow
yesterday. He said he had applied for 'temporary political asylum' in Russia and
added that he believed he was right to leak US secrets

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              156 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday

Front: 'I have been hounded' - Snowden hits out at America

BYLINE: Alec Luhn Moscow Miriam Elder Paul Lewis Washington

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1053 words


The American whistleblower Edward Snowden yesterday accused the US of waging a
campaign of "historically disproportionate aggression" against him during a
meeting with human rights activists and Russian officials at the Moscow airport
where he has been trapped since 23 June.

In his first appearance since disclosing his identity in the Guardian last
month, Snowden insisted he had no regrets and had made a "moral decision" to
leak dozens of secret documents outlining US surveillance programmes. He also
announced that he would apply for political asylum from the Kremlin and appealed
to those present for help in leaving the airport.

The US has lobbied governments around the world to refuse entry to Snowden and
has invalidated his US passport.

"The government and intelligence services of the United States of America have
attempted to make an example of me, a warning to all others who might speak out
as I have," Snowden said. "I have been made stateless and hounded for my act of
political expression."

White House spokesman Jay Carney has accused Russia of "providing a propaganda
platform" for Snowden "counter to the Russian government's previous declarations
of Russia's neutrality". He said: "It's also incompatible with Russian
assurances that they do not want Mr Snowden to further damage US interests." He
urged Russia to hand Snowden over to face charges in the US but added that the
US didn't want the affair to damage America's relations with Russia. Pointedly,
he said the Russian government should permit human rights groups to do their
work "throughout Russia, not just at the Moscow transit lounge".

President Obama spoke to his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, by telephone
last night but there was no breakthrough on the issue.

Snowden appeared relaxed and in good spirits in camera-phone footage posted on
the website of the Russian tabloid newspaper LifeNews. At one point, as he was
assailing the US for attempting to "legitimise an illegal affair", an airport
announcement broke in. He smiled: "I've heard this many times." He said he would
request asylum in Russia until he was permitted to travel to Latin America.
Venezuela has offered him political asylum but he remains unable to travel there
without travel documents.

Snowden praised Venezuela, as well as Russia, Bolivia, Nicaragua and Ecuador for
"being the first to stand against human rights violations carried out by the
powerful rather than the powerless" and for "refusing to compromise their
principles in the face of intimidation".

Russia has one of the world's poorest reputations for human rights. In the past
week it brought in two big decisions against whistleblowers: the lawyer Sergei
Magnitsky was found posthumously guilty of tax fraud, and a judge announced he
would soon issue a verdict against corruption activist Alexei Navalny.

Several officials close to the Kremlin attended yesterday's 5pm meeting at
Sheremetyevo, including Vyacheslav Nikonov, an MP with Putin's United Russia
party, and Vladimir Lukin, Putin's human rights ombudsman. Nikonov said he had
asked Snowden how he was enjoying his time in Russia. "He laughed - and said,
it's safe here," Nikonov said.

Earlier this month, Snowden withdrew a request for asylum in Russia, a move the
Kremlin explained by saying he had not agreed with terms set out by Putin
calling on him to "stop bringing harm to our American partners". According to
attendees, Snowden argued that his leaks were serving, rather than harming, the
American people. "He said he doesn't want to bring harm to the United States and
sees himself as a law-abiding citizen and a patriot," Nikonov said.

Sergei Naryshkin, speaker of the Duma and a close Putin ally, said Russia should
grant Snowden asylum.

Nikonov and other attendees, including Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch and
Sergei Nikitin of Amnesty, were swarmed by journalists as they arrived.
Correspondents mobbed the activists as they made their way toward an airport
employee with a sign reading "G9", identified in Snowden's email as the marker
that would lead them to him. Lokshina said the US embassy had contacted her en
route to the airport urging her to tell Snowden that the US position was that
"he is not a human rights defender, he is not a whistleblower, and that he
violated the law and should be held responsible". She said she told Snowden, who
responded that "he understands that the US authorities look at the situation in
that way, but he completely disagrees with that approach".

The horde followed the airport employee upstairs, with journalists running up
downward escalators to get ahead, and the invitees were ushered through a
service door guarded by police and into a hallway with a metal detector.
Lokshina later said that they did not undergo any security checks and were only
asked to not film the event.

The atmosphere was tense as journalists crowded to get footage and quotes after
they emerged from the 45-minute meeting. At least one fistfight erupted between
two cameramen.

Yesterday's proceedings left little doubt that the Russian authorities are
actively involved in Snowden's stay at Sheremetyevo. Airport staff organised and
conducted the event, and order was kept by a small cadre of police officers.
Attendees said the meeting was watched by men in suits, whom Nikitin said looked
like government operatives: "I'm no expert, but if a man in a tie is standing
there with a military bearing and a serviceman's expression, who is he, a school
teacher?"

Russia has denied any involvement and continues to insist he is not on Russian
territory since he has not crossed the border at Sheremetyevo. Snowden stressed
in his statement that he "did not partner with any foreign government to
guarantee my safety. Instead, I took what I knew to the public, and I asked the
world for justice."

Attendees said Snowden looked healthy. "He smiled, he looked confident, he
looked like he believes he's in the right," Nikonov said. "He didn't joke,
because he understands the seriousness of the situation."

Nikitin said: "He didn't look scared, he looked cheerful . . . although his face
looked a little pale, you can understand why if a person is located the whole
time within four walls."

Captions:

Edward Snowden at his press conference. He said: 'I have been made stateless for
my act of political expression'

1

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              158 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday
                                   1 Edition

Snowden seeks asylum

BYLINE: Alessandra Prentice MOSCOW

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 432 words


Former intelligence agency contractor Edward Snowden will seek temporary
political asylum in Russia, according to human rights groups that met him
yesterday.

The Kremlin told Snowden,  who has been on the run since disclosing details of
US electronic surveillance programmes, that  he should refrain from criticising
the United States if he wants refuge in Russia.

Participants in a meeting with human rights groups at Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport, where he has been stranded in the transit area since June 23, said
Snowden would seek to travel on to Latin America.

"Snowden is serious about obtaining political asylum in  the Russian
Federation," said Vyacheslav Nikonov, a pro- Kremlin lawmaker who attended the
meeting.

President Vladimir Putin's spokesman repeated earlier  conditions that Snowden
should stop harming the interests of the United States if he wants asylum.

"We need to check this information, but as far as we know, he considers himself
a defender of human rights and a campaigner for democratic ideals," spokesman
Dmitry Peskov explained.

Nikonov said that this message had got through.

"He said it would be easy for him to fulfil this requirement," Nikonov told
reporters. He added that Snowden did not consider his actions to be harmful to
his country.

Peskov said he was unaware of a formal request for political asylum from Snowden
. Separately, a Russian official said Snowden was expected to submit one.

A grainy picture of Snowden taken by one participant, with legal assistant Sarah
Harrison to his right, soon surfaced on social media and news sites. He wore a
grey jacket and looked in good health.

Snowden, 30, had not been seen in public since his arrival, and Russian
officials have shown increasing impatience over his stay. But it has also become
clear that Snowden has no clear route to a safe haven from Moscow.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have offered Snowden asylum, but he has not
revealed his plans. Washington, which seeks to arrest Snowden on charges of
espionage in divulging details of secret US surveillance programmes, has revoked
Snowden's passport and pressed nations not to take him in or help him travel.

"In recent weeks we have witnessed an unlawful campaign by officials in the US
Government to deny my right to seek and enjoy this asylum under Article 14 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights," he wrote earlier to the rights
groups.

"The scale of threatening behavior is without precedent," read the letter, a
copy of which was posted on Facebook by Tanya Lokshina, deputy director of the
Moscow office of New York-based Human Rights Watch.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: deal: Edward Snowden said he would fulfil Russian requirements.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GH


                      Copyright 2013 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              159 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday

Snowden said to have asked Russia for asylum;
U.S. ex-contractor breaks silence at meeting with rights groups at airport

BYLINE: ELLEN BARRY and ANDREW ROTH

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1473 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

The U.S. ex-contractor set up a meeting with human rights groups at Sheremetyevo
Airport on Friday, reportedly to discuss his request for asylum in Russia,
possibly as a prelude to flying to Latin America.

FULL TEXT

Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive American intelligence contractor, met with
representatives of international human rights organizations at his temporary
refuge in an airport near Moscow on Friday afternoon and appealed for their help
in seeking asylum status in Russia until he can safely travel to Latin America.

Breaking his silence and seclusion after having spent nearly three weeks in
geopolitical limbo within the international transit zone at Sheremetyevo
Airport, Mr. Snowden told the representatives that ''the only way for him to
have safety guarantees for temporary stay in Russia is apparently to get an
asylum in Russia,'' Tanya Lokshina, a Human Rights Watch representative who
attended the meeting, said in an e-mail. ''So he is asking for one.''

Mr. Snowden had expressed interest in applying for asylum in Russia after his
first week at the airport but quickly reconsidered after hearing the Kremlin's
conditions, Russian officials have said. President Vladimir V. Putin, who has
not appeared eager to grant Mr. Snowden asylum, has said that Mr. Snowden can
stay in Russia only if he agrees to ''cease his work aimed at inflicting damage
on our American partners.''

Vyacheslav A. Nikonov, a pro-Kremlin political scientist who attended the
meeting, said that Mr. Snowden now seemed comfortable agreeing to that
condition. But it remained unclear whether that would mean Mr. Snowden would
stop releasing classified U.S. intelligence data. He has said previously that he
does not consider such disclosures to be harmful to U.S. interests.

''He said, yes, he is aware of the conditions, and it is very easy for him to
answer yes,'' Mr. Nikonov said. ''He agrees with the conditions. First, because
all he did to hurt the interests of the United States is in the past, and what
the journalists are doing now is not his fault. And second, he has no intention
of hurting the United States more, since he is a loyal citizen.''

Genri M. Reznik, a prominent Russian defense lawyer who had also been invited to
the meeting, said that there was no evidence of Russian security personnel
there. He noted, however, that the government had clearly approved the event,
since airport officials collected the attendees' passports and escorted them to
the sector of the airport that is considered an international border zone.

''That's what we would call 'political will' here,'' he said. He added that Mr.
Snowden appeared healthy and cheerful.

''He spoke like a free man. He was smiling,'' Mr. Reznik said.

Sergei Nikitin, an invited representative from Amnesty International, also said
that Mr. Snowden had appeared well, describing his appearance as ''entirely
cheerful.''

''I asked him if he had enough time to learn some Russian, and he smiled at my
joke,'' Mr. Nikitin said. ''He had a pleasant face.''

Moments after Mr. Snowden made clear that he was seeking asylum in Russia, Mr.
Putin's spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, told the Interfax news agency that Mr.
Putin's condition was still in force, and that Mr. Snowden could hypothetically
remain if he agreed to it.

After the meeting, Anatoly Kucherena, a Kremlin-connected lawyer who was also on
the list of invitees, told Russian television that he believed the decision on
whether to grant Mr. Snowden asylum could be made within two or three weeks. He
said the request must first be addressed to the Federal Migration Service, which
will then send its recommendation to a presidential commission that governs
citizenship.

Russian officials have suggested more than once that they would like Mr. Snowden
to leave Russia, where he fled on June 23 from Hong Kong, one step ahead of a
U.S. extradition request to prosecute him on charges he violated espionage laws
by revealing classified surveillance information.

Mr. Snowden, 30, and his supporters describe him as a whistle-blower who exposed
privacy abuses by the U.S. government.

The Kremlin has tried to stake out a neutral position on Mr. Snowden. Either
granting or refusing his request for asylum carries risks: To refuse his
application would send the message that Russia has bent to the will of the
United States, while granting it could inflict long-term damage on relations
with Washington.

The United States has revoked Mr. Snowden's passport, complicating his effort
for further travel and leaving him in limbo.

Mr. Snowden's meeting with rights activists came hours before President Barack
Obama was scheduled to talk by telephone with Mr. Putin. The phone call, which
had been arranged several days earlier, would be their first conversation since
Mr. Snowden arrived in Moscow.

The White House complained that Mr. Snowden's public appearance Friday had
violated Moscow's own stated desire to avoid any further damage to U.S. national
security. But the White House also said that the United States did not want the
episode to undercut relations between the two countries.

''Providing a propaganda platform for Mr. Snowden runs counter to the Russian
government's previous declarations of Russia's neutrality and that they have no
control over his presence in the airport,'' said Jay Carney, the White House
press secretary. ''It's also incompatible with Russian assurances that they do
not want Mr. Snowden to further damage U.S. interests.''

He added that ''we don't believe this should and we don't want it to do harm to
our important relationship with Russia.''

According to Ms. Lokshina, Mr. Snowden asked the assembled human rights figures
to petition on his behalf, to the United States - so that it will not block his
efforts to receive asylum - and to Mr. Putin. She said Mr. Snowden told his
guests that he had been forced to turn to Russia for asylum because he could not
travel to Latin America safely.

Ms. Lokshina said in her e-mail that Mr. Snowden ''wants our assistance in
getting guarantees of safe passage to Latin America and safety guarantees to
stay in Russia until he can travel to Latin America.''

She also said that Mr. Snowden had asked the representatives to ''petition the
U.S. and European states not to interfere with the asylum process.''

Mr. Snowden requested the meeting in a series of e-mails that were delivered to
human rights figures on Thursday.

Anna Zakharenkova, the airport's director of public relations, said that the
rights workers were escorted through security and passport control and into the
transit zone at 5 p.m.

The guests were guided onto a bus, which traveled a short distance before
delivering them to another spot in the terminal, and they were led to a small
room where Mr. Snowden was seated at a desk. Photographs taken at the meeting
showed him to be looking well, in a crisp button-down shirt and a slight growth
of beard. To his right sat Sarah Harrison, an employee of WikiLeaks, the
anti-secrecy group, which has been assisting him in seeking refuge from U.S.
prosecution.

No invitation was extended to Russian officials, said Mr. Peskov, the Kremlin
spokesman. Journalists who asked to be included were told that Mr. Snowden's
team ''will be following up with the press shortly afterward.''

The United States has pressed to prevent Mr. Snowden from receiving asylum in
Bolivia, Nicaragua or Venezuela, three left-leaning governments that have said
they would take him in.

Ms. Lokshina of Human Rights Watch said she had initially harbored doubts about
the Snowden invitation's authenticity. ''I'm not sure this is for real, but
compelled to give it a try,'' she wrote in a post on Facebook. ''I wouldn't want
to create an impression that HRW is not interested in what Snowden has to say.''

The e-mail, signed ''Edward Joseph Snowden,'' said he had ''been extremely
fortunate to enjoy and accept many offers of support and asylum from brave
countries around the world,'' and that he hoped to visit each of them personally
to express his thanks. It went on to say that the U.S. government had carried
out an ''unlawful campaign'' to block his asylum bids.

''The scale of threatening behavior is without precedent: never before in
history have states conspired to force to the ground a sovereign president's
plane to effect a search for a political refugee,'' the note said. ''I invite
the human rights organizations or other respected individuals addressed to join
me on 12 July at 5 p.m. at Sheremetyevo Airport outside Moscow for a brief
statement and discussion regarding the next steps forward in my situation.''

The message referred to an episode on July 2 in which a plane carrying President
Evo Morales back to Bolivia from Moscow was rerouted after being denied entry
into the airspace of France and Portugal because of suspicions that Mr. Snowden
was on board.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              160 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

Snowden seeks help on Russia asylum

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


Edward Snowden hasn't budged from the transit area of a Moscow airport, but his
search for political asylum has come full circle.

The former contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency, who revealed
Washington's secret efforts to track international telephone and Internet
communications, called Russian human rights activists and lawyers to
Sheremetyevo International Airport on Friday and asked them for help gaining
asylum in Russia -- at least for now.

The request reflects the tight spot Snowden is in almost three weeks after
arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong, where he originally fled after leaving the
United States. It puts the focus back on Russian President Vladimir Putin and
threatens to worsen already tense relations between Moscow and the United
States, which has demanded Snowden's return.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua have indicated they will consider asylum
requests from Snowden. But the logistics of traveling from Moscow to Latin
America are daunting, and it's unclear whether any concrete planning has even
begun.

"He is in a situation with no way out," said lawyer Alexander Kucherena, who was
among those meeting with Snowden on Friday. "He has no passport and can travel
nowhere; he has no visa."

If he receives asylum in Russia, Snowden can apply for citizenship in five
years, said Kucherena, who added that he would help with the paperwork. The
final decision will be made by Putin, he said.

The White House reacted angrily to Snowden's meeting Friday, accusing Russia of
providing him with a "propaganda platform." White House Press Secretary Jay
Carney said allowing the meeting ran "counter to the Russian government's
previous declaration of Russian neutrality," and to its assertions that it had
no control over his presence in the transit area of the airport.

President Obama spoke Friday by telephone with Putin on a number of issues,
including the status of Snowden, the White House said. It did not provide
details.

The meeting with Snowden also put organizations that regularly accuse the
Russian government of human rights abuses in the position of being asked to
serve as intermediary to the Kremlin on his behalf.

Human rights activist Tanya Lokshina, who attended the meeting with Snowden,
said he told them asylum in Russia was the only option he saw that would provide
for his security.

"Basically he asked us to help him on two issues: first to petition for his
request for asylum to Putin, at least until he could travel to Latin America,"
said Lokshina, director of Human Rights Watch's Moscow office. "Secondly, he
would like us to appeal to the governments of the United States and countries of
the European Union not to interfere with his asylum-seeking process."

She quoted Snowden as saying that it would be easy for him to comply with
Putin's demand that he stop leaking information harmful to the U.S. "I didn't do
any damage to the United States," she quoted Snowden as saying.

Human Rights Watch said in a statement that Snowden's request for asylum should
be treated fairly by Russia or any other country to which he might apply.

Russian officials said last week that Snowden had withdrawn an earlier request
for asylum because of Putin's demand. They did not comment Friday on the new
request. But some commentators said the involvement of human rights
organizations would be a convenient way for Russian authorities to justify
keeping him in the country.

"Putin may dislike and even despise him for what he is, a traitor in his eyes,
but he won't let Snowden out of his hands," said Alexander Ryklin, editor of the
online Daily Journal.

Sergei Naryshkin, speaker of the lower house of Russia's parliament, told the
Rossiya-24 news network that the request for asylum should be granted.

"I consider Edward Snowden a human rights activist struggling for the rights of
millions and millions of people in the entire world," Naryshkin said.

Igor Korotchenko, editor in chief of the journal National Defense, predicted
Snowden would receive asylum.

"I think his chances to get asylum in Russia are 99%, especially with the
backing that Russian human rights activists appear to be inclined to render," he
said. "Besides, he promised today that he would stop activities damaging the
prestige of the CIA and NSA."

But the leaks have continued even as Snowden has been holed up at the airport.
On Sunday, the front page of Brazil's O Globo newspaper carried a report by
Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald, who has collaborated with Snowden. The
report provided details of alleged spying in Brazil and other Latin American
countries, including Mexico and Colombia.

Brazil demanded clarification from U.S. officials. The news filled front pages
of Mexican newspapers and much of the programming on radio talk shows. Mexican
President Enrique Pena Nieto said that if the reports were true, the activity
was "totally unacceptable."

U.S. officials have vowed to pursue and extradite Snowden, who was charged by
federal prosecutors last month with two violations of the Espionage Act and
theft of government property.

The U.S. is pressuring other governments not to grant him asylum. A plane
carrying Bolivian President Evo Morales home from Moscow last week was forced to
land in Vienna because of concern that Morales was taking Snowden to Bolivia
with him.

Snowden was accompanied at the airport meeting by two women, one of whom was
identified by Rossiya-24 as Sarah Harrison, legal assistant for WikiLeaks.
WikiLeaks has been assisting Snowden, who reportedly has requested asylum from
about 30 nations.

Snowden was somewhat nervous during the meeting but quite cheerful, Russian
lawmaker Vyacheslav Nikonov told Rossiya-24.

"He started with a kind of statement to the effect that a month ago, 'I had a
family, I had a house, I had money and everything,' " Nikonov said. "Now he
feels he has a mission, but he doesn't want to become a target."

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

Times staff writers Christi Parsons in Washington and Tracy Wilkinson in Mexico
City contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: POLICE GUARD an entrance to the transit area at Moscow's
Sheremetyevo airport, where NSA leaker Edward Snowden is holed up.
PHOTOGRAPHER:Sergei Ilnitsky European Pressphoto Agency PHOTO: EDWARD SNOWDEN
wants asylum in Russia, at least until he can travel to Latin America.
PHOTOGRAPHER:Tanya Lokshina

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              161 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday

Obama tells China he is disappointed over its handling of the Snowden security
leaks debaclePresident Barack Obama told Chinese officials that he is
disappointed with China's treatment of US demands that Hong Kong hand over
fugitive security contractor Edward Snowden, who was allowed to flee to Russia.

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 475 words


The issue surfaced during a meeting in Washington yesterday between Obama and
Vice Premier Wang Yang as well as State Councillor Yang Jiechi, who were
representing China at strategic and economic talks in the city, according to a
White House statement.

"The president expressed his disappointment and concern with China's handling of
the Snowden case," according to the White House statement.

Snowden, who exposed classified US programmes that collect telephone and
Internet data, left Hong Kong for Russia on June 23 even as American authorities
were pressing for his return to face prosecution. He is believed to be at a
Moscow airport, where he's pursuing asylum in another country.

The US pursuit of Snowden has emerged as a sticking point in international
relations, particularly with Russia and China. Secretary of State John Kerry
last month warned China and Russia of "consequences" for their actions and
ridiculed Snowden for choosing them "as assistants in his flight from justice
because they're such powerful bastions of Internet freedom". US officials have
since softened their tone, with Obama saying on June 27 that he wouldn't
jeopardise cooperation on broader issues with China or Russia over Snowden. The
30-year-old systems administrator was in Hong Kong when he revealed himself last
month as the source of leaks on the top-secret National Security Agency
surveillance programmes.

Prosecutors in the US are seeking Snowden's return and have brought theft and
espionage charges against him.

Earlier yesterday, Deputy Secretary of State William Burns said at an event
concluding the strategic and economic talks that the decision by authorities in
Hong Kong and Beijing to let Snowden leave for Moscow "undermined the trust
needed to manage difficult issues".

"With regard to Snowden case, the central government of China has always
respected the Hong Kong government's handling of cases in accordance with law,"
Yang said, adding Hong Kong "handled the Snowden case in accordance with law and
its approach is beyond reproach".

Obama's Oval Office meeting with the Chinese officials covered a range of
economic and strategic matters, including cooperation on curtailing North
Korea's nuclear ambitions and efforts to open China's economy to further US
investment, according to the White House.

The discussions also touched on the issue of computer hacking, a subject that
has been complicated by the case.

While US officials have accused the Chinese government of orchestrating attacks
on American networks, Snowden has asserted that the US has been hacking into
computers in Hong Kong and mainland China since 2009. Yang alluded to Snowden's
allegations in his remarks yesterday.

"China is a victim of hacking attacks," Yang said. "China's view is that the
relevant international cyber rules should be developed by the United Nations."

Bloomberg

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              162 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Snowden Renews Plea for Moscow To Grant Asylum

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY and ANDREW ROTH; Reporting was contributed by Peter Baker
from Washington; Rick Gladstone from New York; William Neuman from Caracas,
Venezuela; Nick Cumming-Bruce from Geneva; and Noah Sneider from Moscow.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1700 words


MOSCOW -- In a high-profile spectacle that had the hallmarks of a
Kremlin-approved event, Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive American intelligence
contractor, broke his silence after three weeks of seclusion on Friday, telling
a handpicked group of Russian public figures that he hoped to receive political
asylum in Russia.

The guests, several of them closely aligned with President Vladimir V. Putin,
were invited through a mysterious e-mail that many had thought was fake and then
swept past passport control into the restricted border zone where Mr. Snowden
has been confined since his arrival on June 23.

When they emerged, it appeared more likely that Mr. Snowden would be granted his
wish and remain in Russia as he waits for conditions that would allow him to
travel safely to Latin America, where three countries have offered him asylum.

Russia allowed Mr. Snowden to fly into Moscow, and officials have clearly
relished the opportunity to embrace an American dissident after weathering years
of Western criticism of their human rights record.

But once Mr. Snowden was ensconced in the airport, the prospect of his long-term
presence in Russia apparently seemed less appealing. His first request for
asylum two weeks ago was discouraged, and Russia has taken pains to portray
itself as neutral. Since then, Mr. Snowden's options have narrowed, and so have
the Kremlin's, said Dmitri V. Trenin, the director of the Carnegie Moscow
Center, a research center in Moscow.

''They cannot keep him here indefinitely, they cannot extradite himself to the
U.S., they cannot send him out of the country so that he can be picked up,'' Mr.
Trenin said. ''The government at this stage feels they have to do something to
end this stalemate, and the only way to end the stalemate is to go to a default
position -- that has always been that he stays in Russia and observes certain
rules.''

The Kremlin has laid some groundwork for holding Mr. Snowden on a more permanent
basis. Ten days ago, perhaps in an attempt to limit damage to the bilateral
relationship, Mr. Putin said Mr. Snowden could stay only if he agreed to ''cease
his work aimed at inflicting damage on our American partners.'' A number of
conservative, Kremlin-connected figures have praised Mr. Snowden as a defender
of human rights and called for granting asylum.

On Friday evening, President Obama talked to Mr. Putin by phone in their first
conversation since Mr. Snowden arrived in Moscow. The White House offered no
details about the call, other than to issue a statement saying the two had
discussed ''the status of Mr. Edward Snowden'' as well as issues like
counterterrorism and the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.

Earlier Friday, Mr. Putin's spokesman reiterated the Russian president's
previous offer, and human rights figures who participated in the airport event
reported that Mr. Snowden said he accepted the conditions. But Mr. Snowden has
said on numerous occasions that he did not think his disclosures had hurt
American interests, and it remained unclear whether he planned to continue
leaking classified documents.

The developments precede by just two months Mr. Obama's scheduled visit to
Moscow and St. Petersburg, part of an effort to reinvigorate a relationship that
has declined sharply over the last year.

The White House complained that the prospect of Russian asylum would violate
Moscow's own stated desire to avoid any further damage to American national
security, but it also said that the United States did not want the episode to
undercut relations.

''Providing a propaganda platform for Mr. Snowden runs counter to the Russian
government's previous declarations of Russia's neutrality and that they have no
control over his presence in the airport,'' said Jay Carney, the White House
press secretary. ''It's also incompatible with Russian assurances that they do
not want Mr. Snowden to further damage U.S. interests.''

But Mr. Carney added, ''We don't believe this should, and we don't want it to do
harm to our important relationship with Russia.''

Nevertheless, the administration's rapt attention to the case was evident on
Friday morning. A Human Rights Watch representative, Tanya Lokshina, said an
embassy staff member had called her as she was en route to the meeting.

The caller said the ambassador ''asked me to share with you the official
position of the U.S. authorities so that you can share it with Mr. Snowden,' ''
Ms. Lokshina said. ''He said the U.S. authorities did not consider him to be a
human rights defender and a whistle-blower. He broke the law and he has to be
held accountable.''

A State Department official acknowledged that an embassy staff member had made
the call, but said that Ms. Lokshina had not been asked to convey any message to
Mr. Snowden.

In remarks on Friday, the United Nations' top human rights official said that
there should be greater protections for Mr. Snowden and others like him who
disclose human rights violations.

''Snowden's case has shown the need to protect persons disclosing information on
matters that have implications for human rights, as well as the importance of
ensuring respect for the right to privacy,'' the official, Navi Pillay, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, said in a statement released
in Geneva.

She added, ''National legal systems must ensure that there are adequate avenues
for individuals disclosing violations of human rights to express their concern
without fear of reprisals.''

In addition, the presidents of Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela issued a
resolution on Friday voicing solidarity with the countries in the region that
have offered asylum to Mr. Snowden and condemned surveillance practices like
those he disclosed.

The meeting in Moscow unfolded in an atmosphere of mystery, beginning late on
Thursday, when a series of about a dozen Russian figures -- lawyers, human
rights workers and some political commentators -- received an e-mailed
invitation signed ''Edward Joseph Snowden.'' Many assumed it was a fake, but by
the appointed meeting time of 5 p.m. at least 150 reporters had massed at the
airport, eager for any sign of Mr. Snowden, whose presence in Moscow had not
once been visually documented.

A man in a black suit appeared, holding a sign that read G9, the signal
described in the invitation from Mr. Snowden, and said, ''Invited guests, come
with me.'' He led them down a long corridor and guided them onto a waiting bus,
as police officers fended off the journalists.

Around 45 minutes later, the guests emerged to a bank of cameras.

''Mr. Snowden is not a phantom, such a man exists,'' said Genri M. Reznik, a
prominent Russian defense lawyer. Vladimir P. Lukin, Russia's human rights
commissioner, told Russian television: ''I shook his hand. I could feel skin and
bones.''

Mr. Lukin added: ''He said that of course he is concerned about freedom of
movement, lack of it, but as for the rest, he is not complaining about this
living conditions. As he said, 'I've seen worse situations.' ''

Ms. Lokshina described Mr. Snowden as ''like a college kid,'' shy and barely
looking up from his written statement as he read it. In the statement, he
accused the United States of ''a serious violation of the law'' in its metadata
mining programs and ridiculed Washington's argument ''that secret court rulings,
which the world is not permitted to see, somehow legitimize an illegal affair.''

He said that ''Russia, Venezuela, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Ecuador have my
gratitude and respect for being the first to stand against human rights
violations carried out by the powerful,'' and added that ''some governments in
Western European and North American states have demonstrated a willingness to
act outside the law'' by blocking his travel.

Though the Kremlin earlier signaled reluctance to consider Mr. Snowden's
application -- an initial request submitted on June 30 was withdrawn -- now it
seems quite likely to grant it. After the meeting, Anatoly Kucherena, a
Kremlin-connected lawyer who also was on the list of invitees, told Russian
television that he believed the decision on whether to grant Mr. Snowden
political asylum could be made within two or three weeks.

The request must first be addressed to the Federal Migration Service, which will
then send its recommendation to a presidential commission that governs
citizenship.

The question of whether Mr. Snowden should receive asylum has been hotly debated
in Russia, with conservative-leaning Kremlin loyalists and many human rights
figures vocally supportive of the idea. Public figures began to emerge with
fresh statements of support shortly after Mr. Snowden's meeting with human
rights figures ended.

''I consider Edward Snowden a human rights defender, who speaks for the rights
of millions and millions of people all over the world,'' said Sergei Naryshkin,
the speaker of Russia's lower house of Parliament and a close Putin ally. He
noted that the United States still has capital punishment, and said, ''I think
there is a very high risk that this punishment awaits Edward Snowden.''

In fact, the charges that Mr. Snowden faces do not carry the death penalty upon
conviction.

Mr. Snowden, 30, and his supporters describe him as a whistle-blower who exposed
privacy abuses by the United States government. He flew from Hong Kong to Moscow
on June 23, evidently planning to catch a connecting flight to Latin America,
but after he landed it was announced that the United States had invalidated his
passport, so that he could not legally board a plane.

Meanwhile, the United States has conducted a diplomatic full-court press in an
effort to prevent Mr. Snowden from receiving asylum in Bolivia, Nicaragua or
Venezuela, three left-leaning governments that have said they would take him in.

At the meeting on Friday, Mr. Snowden asked the assembled human rights figures
to petition on his behalf, both to the United States -- so that it will not
block his efforts to receive asylum -- and to Mr. Putin. He told his guests that
he had been forced to turn to Russia for asylum because he could not travel to
Latin America safely.

''He made it fairly clear that he would not want to stay in Russia
indefinitely,'' Ms. Lokshina said in an interview.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/13/world/europe/snowden-russia-asylum.html

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: An image of the former C.I.A. employee Edward J. Snowden taken
at his meeting with Russian public figures at a Moscow airport. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
SERGEI ILNITSKY/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A1)
 Human rights officials at Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow after  meeting with
the intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES HILL FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (A3)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday

White House criticizes Russia for Snowden meeting

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 679 words


WASHINGTON (AP) The White House criticized Russia on Friday for allowing
National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden to meet with human rights
activists, calling it a "propaganda platform" for the man who seeks to avoid
prosecution for leaking classified information about secret U.S. electronic
surveillance programs.

A Russian lawmaker who was among the officials who met privately with Snowden in
the transit zone of Sheremetyevo airport on Friday said Snowden wants asylum in
Russia and is willing to stop sharing the secrets in his possession in exchange
for such a deal.

White House spokesman Jay Carney said Russia should instead send Snowden back to
the U.S. to face the felony charges that are pending against him.

"Providing a propaganda platform for Mr. Snowden runs counter to the Russian
government"s previous declarations of Russia"s neutrality and that they have no
control over his presence in the airport," Carney said. "It"s also incompatible
with Russian assurances that they do not want Mr. Snowden to further damage U.S.
interests."

State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki used similar language to express
disappointment over the meeting.

"We are disappointed that Russian officials and agencies facilitated this
meeting today by allowing these activists and representatives into the Moscow
airport"s transit zone to meet with Mr. Snowden despite the government"s
declarations of Russia"s neutrality with respect to Mr. Snowden," Psaki said.
"Our concern here is that he"s been provided this opportunity to speak in a
propaganda platform."

President Barack Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin discussed Snowden,
among other issues, during a telephone call on Friday, the White House said in a
terse statement that provided no specifics of their conversation about the NSA
leaker. Carney said the call was planned several days ago, suggesting that it
was unrelated to Snowden"s meeting with the activists.

Carney said Snowden is not a human rights activist or a dissident. "He is
accused of leaking classified information, has been charged with three felony
counts and should be returned to the United States," the spokesman said.

Carney also urged the Russian government to "afford human rights organizations
the ability to do their work in Russia throughout Russia, not just at the Moscow
transit lounge."

Snowden is believed to have been staying at the airport transit zone since June
23, when he arrived by air from Hong Kong. He fled to Hong Kong from the U.S.
before his revelations were made public. Snowden had been expected to transfer
in Moscow to a Cuba-bound flight, but he did not get on the plane.

He made an initial bid for asylum in Russia, but Putin said Snowden would have
to agree to stop leaking the classified information in his possession before
asylum would be considered. Snowden then withdrew his bid.

It was not immediately clear whether Russia would take Snowden up on his latest
request for asylum. The Kremlin has signaled that it wants him out of the
country. Granting asylum could further test U.S.-Russia relations.

Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua recently offered Snowden asylum.

At the State Department, Psaki denied that the U.S. ambassador to Russia,
Michael McFaul, had telephoned a representative from Human Rights Watch. The
anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has been assisting Snowden, said in a
statement that McFaul called the Human Rights Watch representative on her way to
the airport and asked her to relay a message to Snowden that he is not
considered a whistle-blower and was wanted in the United States.

Psaki said a U.S. Embassy officer placed the call.

"Ambassador McFaul did not call any representative from Human Rights Watch," she
said. "An embassy officer did call to explain our position ... but at no point
did this official or any official from the U.S. government ask anyone to convey
a message to Mr. Snowden."

Psaki confirmed, however, that U.S. officials have been in touch with
individuals who attended the meeting.

___

Follow Darlene Superville on Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/dsupervilleap

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              165 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday

Russia: no asylum application from Snowden

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 489 words


MOSCOW (AP) Russian immigration officials said Saturday they have not received
an application from Edward Snowden, the U.S. National Security Agency leaker who
wants to get asylum in Russia.

Snowden came to Moscow"s Sheremetyevo international airport on June 23 from Hong
Kong, apparently intending to board a flight to Cuba. But he did not get on that
flight and is believed to have spent the last three weeks marooned in the
airport"s transit zone.

On Friday, he met with human rights activists there and said he would seek
Russian asylum, at least as a temporary measure before going to Venezuela,
Bolivia or Nicaragua, all of which have offered him asylum.

But the Interfax news agency quoted Russian migration service head Konstantin
Romodanovsky as saying no asylum request had been received as of Saturday. The
state news agency RIA Novosti cited migration service spokeswoman, Zalina
Kornilova, as also saying no request had been received.

Snowden had made a previous bid for Russian asylum, but President Vladimir Putin
said he would have to agree to stop further leaks of information about American
intelligence service activities before it would be considered. Snowden withdrew
the bid, but participants in Friday"s meeting said he was now ready to agree to
stop leaks.

Granting asylum to Snowden would add significant new stress to already-troubled
Washington-Moscow relations.

Putin and President Barack Obama are expected to hold a summit in Moscow in
early September, right before both take part in the Group of 20 summit in St.
Petersburg, and the Snowden issue could overshadow both gatherings.

Obama and Putin discussed Snowden, among other issues, during a telephone call
on Friday, the White House said in a terse statement that provided no specifics
of their conversation about the NSA leaker. White House spokesman Jay Carney
said the call was planned several days ago, suggesting that it was unrelated to
Snowden"s meeting with the activists.

Russia so far has sidestepped the issue by claiming that it cannot take action
on Snowden because his presence in the transit zone puts him technically outside
Russian territory. But by agreeing to the condition that he stop leaks, Snowden
could force Russia"s hand.

Friday"s meeting in the airport"s transit zone included representatives of
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. The presence of these
internationally respected organizations could add weight to Snowden"s asylum
bid.

U.S. State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said Friday the United States
disapproved of Russia facilitating what she called a "propaganda platform" for
Snowden, "despite the government"s declarations of Russia"s neutrality with
respect to Mr. Snowden."

On Saturday, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov aimed to keep up the
appearance of neutrality. "We are not having contact with Snowden," he said at a
meeting of a regional security organization in Kyrgyzstan, according to
Interfax.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              166 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       July 13, 2013 Saturday 8:14 AM GMT

Edward Snowden striving to keep his options open;
Now that Edward Snowden has shown his hand, Damien McElroy assesses his options
and where he can go from here.

BYLINE: By Damien McElroy Foreign Affairs Correspondent

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 409 words


What are Edward Snowden's chances of finding a lasting refuge from US justice?

Mr Snowden has one overriding objective - to ensure that he never faces a US
court on charges of betraying his homeland. However, he faces a determined Obama
administration.

There are legal experts who believe Mr Snowden has a strong case under
international law to claim asylum as he engaged in a form of "protected speech",
exposing unlawful behaviour by his government.

What is temporary asylum? Is it even a concept that can protect him?

By claiming that he wants only a provisional form of asylum in Russia, Mr
Snowden is attempting to preserve his preferred option of moving to South
America.

But in theory, refugee status should be recognised and granted by the first
country that the applicant reaches. However, the political dividing lines that
have been drawn up around Snowden could allow him to maintain the other offers
from Latin states.

Where will Mr Snowden live in the immediate future?

Launching some form of asylum process in Russia would ensure that he could leave
the airport and move into accommodation until he can be sure of reaching his
final destination. But President Vladimir Putin has sounded cool on Mr Snowden's
pleas for refuge - saying that he could not "harm our American partners" while
in Russia - so his precise next whereabouts remain uncertain.

Does his asylum bid mean the flow of revelations will now dry up?

Mr Snowden has said that he does not want to harm America, but he has not given
a blanket assurance that he will drop his whistleblowing activities. In any case
the choice may no longer rest with him. Glenn Greenwald, the US journalist who
collaborated with Mr Snowden, has the files at his home and this week said that
it would take him "months" to work through the data for more leaks.

How can Mr Snowden reach his preferred place of exile in South America?

In practice, he would have to find a direct flight route that neither crosses
the airspace of the long list of US allies or encroaches on US airspace. If he
does not mind spending time in a European prison, it may be that he chooses to
fight extradition in the EU courts once his refugee status is established.
Victory in court would mean he could then travel on to South America.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              167 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       July 13, 2013 Saturday 7:54 AM GMT

Edward Snowden found - latest;
Edward Snowden, the fugitive whistleblower, has appeared at Moscow airport where
he looks due to accept asylum in Russia and "not harm" the US. Latest coverage.

BYLINE: By Chris Irvine Barney Henderson

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 4099 words


Edward Snowden 'to apply for asylum in Russia'
Russia had told him he would have to stop harming US interests
Has he run out of options?
Edward Snowden's statement to human rights groups in full

All Snowden news, tip-offs and sightings welcome. Email
chris.irvine@telegraph.co.uk, barney.henderson@telegraph.co.uk or tweet
@chrisirvine86, @barneyhenderson or @telegraphworld

Latest

17.50 That's all from the Snowden live blog, on a day when we can categorically
confirm the whistleblower is in Moscow, and is likely to be for some time.

17.45 Damien McElroy, the Telegraph's Foreign Affairs Correspondent, looks at
Edward Snowden's options now .

Edward Snowden has one overriding objective to ensure that he never faces a US
court on charges betraying his homeland. However his route to safety appears
blocked by US determination to intercept his flight. Legal experts in support of
Mr Snowden believe he has a strong case under international law to claim asylum
as he engaged in a form of "protected speech," exposing unlawful behaviour by
his government.

By claiming that he only wants a provisional form of asylum in Russia, Mr
Snowden is attempting to preserve his preferred option of moving to South
American. But in theory refugee status should be recognised and granted by the
first country that the applictant reaches. However the political dividing lines
that have been drawn up around Snowden should allow him to establish and
maintain other claims on offer.

16.20 Snowden, apparently wants to be called Ed, not Edward. Here is his
statement, through WikiLeaks :

Hello. My name is Ed Snowden. A little over one month ago, I had family, a home
in paradise, and I lived in great comfort. I also had the capability without any
warrant to search for, seize, and read your communications. Anyone's
communications at any time. That is the power to change people's fates.

It is also a serious violation of the law. The 4th and 5th Amendments to the
Constitution of my country, Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and numerous statutes and treaties forbid such systems of massive,
pervasive surveillance. While the US Constitution marks these programs as
illegal, my government argues that secret court rulings, which the world is not
permitted to see, somehow legitimize an illegal affair. These rulings simply
corrupt the most basic notion of justice - that it must be seen to be done. The
immoral cannot be made moral through the use of secret law.

I believe in the principle declared at Nuremberg in 1945: "Individuals have
international duties which transcend the national obligations of obedience.
Therefore individual citizens have the duty to violate domestic laws to prevent
crimes against peace and humanity from occurring."

Accordingly, I did what I believed right and began a campaign to correct this
wrongdoing. I did not seek to enrich myself. I did not seek to sell US secrets.
I did not partner with any foreign government to guarantee my safety. Instead, I
took what I knew to the public, so what affects all of us can be discussed by
all of us in the light of day, and I asked the world for justice.

16.05 There's another picture of Snowden, which may or may not help illustrate
the hair point:

16.00 While most Snowden watchers around the world try to get their heads around
the latest twist in the whistleblower's plight, Iiya Mouzykantskii helpfully
gives a hair update:

Twitter: Ilya Mouzykantskii - Nikonov - #snowden was cheerful, concisely
answered questions, excellent haircut

15.54 State Duma speaker Sergei Naryshkin's statement:

I consider Edward Snowden a human rights defender, who advocates for the rights
of millions of people in the world.

The United States, which is demanding his handover, uses such measures as the
death penalty and the risk is great that this punishment awaits Edward Snowden.
We do not have the right to let it happen. So I believe that Russia should give
Snowden political asylum, or temporary asylum.

15.46 Speaker of Russia's parliament reportedly states that Moscow should grant
asylum to Snowden because he could face the death penalty in the US.

15.31 Snowden has reportedly said he cannot go to Latin America right now. The
detaining of Evo Morales's plane proved the danger, according to Russia Today.
Also, he says living conditions were fine at the airport. He felt safe there,
but he could not stay there forever.

Twitter: RT - Edward #Snowden says living conditions fine at #Sheremetyevo
airport, he feels safe there, but he can't stay forever http://t.co/0OM93L5Yg3

15.30 Separately, Janet Napolitano, the US Homeland Security Secretary, is to
resign from her position to become president of the University of California
system.

15.25 The Wall Street Journal has done a poll on Snowden. 55 per cent of
Americans regard him as a whistleblower, 34 per cent see him as a traitor

Twitter: Wall Street Journal - Poll: 55% of Americans describe Edward Snowden as
a whistleblower, while 34% see him as a traitor. http://t.co/kvdUyCaaGd#NSA

15.24 As this press conference goes on behind closed doors, Glen Greenwald, the
Guardian journalist behind who originally brought Snowden's leaks to light, has
pointed us in the direction of Daniel Ellsberg in the Washington Post . Ellsberg
says that Snowden is right not to return to the US.

Ellsberg was charged in 1971 under the Espionage Act for copying the Pentagon
Papers. The trial was eventually dismissed in 1973.

I hope Snowden's revelations will spark a movement to rescue our democracy, but
he could not be part of that movement had he stayed here. There is zero chance
that he would be allowed out on bail if he returned now and close to no chance
that, had he not left the country, he would have been granted bail. Instead, he
would be in a prison cell like Bradley Manning, incommunicado.

He would almost certainly be confined in total isolation, even longer than the
more than eight months Manning suffered during his three years of imprisonment
before his trial began recently.

15.12 Jake Nelson points out what every picture editor of every news
organisation must be thinking:

Twitter: Jake Nelson - Best thing about this #Snowden briefing in #Sheremetyevo
: we finally have a new stock image of him for use in every news story.

NEW:

OLD:

15.06 This coming via the AFP news agency, but Snowden has apparently vowed at
the meeting "not to harm" the US.

15.01 On that very note, Mr Putin's spokesman has reiterated that Snowden must
refrain from harming the United States if he wanted asylum.

Mr. Snowden could hypothetically stay in Russia if he: first, completely stops
the activities harming our American partners and US-Russian relations and
second, if he asks for this himself.

14.55 It's worth a reminder that Snowden had applied for Russian asylum before,
only to cancel it after Dmitry Peskov, Vladimir Putin's spokesman said he would
have to stop harming US interests if he wanted to stay.

He abandoned his intention and his request to receive the chance of staying in
Russia.

Hypothetically, Snowden could have stayed but on one condition - that he gave up
his intention to carry out, one way or another, anti-American activity
inflicting harm on the United States.

14.52 Tanya Lokshina has told the Interfax news agency that Snowden told
participants "he wants to stay here [Russia]". Public chamber state advisory
body member Olga Kostina has also said he would request asylum in Russia.

14.41 Snowden's clothing getting much scrutiny on Twitter:

Twitter: Simon Jeffery - Edward Snowden not wearing same shirt as before. New
shirt has button down collar

14.40 Snowden to seek temporary asylum in Russia but plans to go to Latin
America eventually, Reuters quotes Wikileaks as saying.

14.31 Snowden says...

Twitter: Ellen Barry - From @TanyaLokshina@hrw : "I am only in a position to
accept Russia's offer because of my inability to travel." #Snowden

14.20 The New York Times Moscow correspondent Ellen Barry tweets that Snowden is
applying for political asylum in Russia:

Twitter: Ellen Barry - Big news is that #Snowden is applying for political
asylum in Russia, despte Putin's condition that he stop publishing. from
@TanyaLokshina

14.15 First picture of Snowden looking relaxed at the press conference, with
Sarah Harrison of WikiLeaks on his right:

14.11 We have started a new Twitter hashtag: #foundsnowden:

Twitter: Chris Irvine - Snowden turns up after all at Moscow airport
#foundsnowdenhttp://t.co/yRsPZaDhdC

14.09 Snowden is at the meeting...

14.04 Looks like the Snowden meeting has begun. Update from Tom:

The man with the G9 sign went through Terminal E. In amazing scenes he was
followed by dozens of excited journalists. He went through a door in Terminal E
with "staff only" written on it. The people invited to the meeting followed him
through and now we are shut outside. Waiting.

13.45 More from Tom Parfitt inside the airport on the suitably mysterious
arrival of a suited man waving a sign indicating the meeting is to start:

A man has appeared in the arrivals hall holding a sign above his head with 'G9'
written on it. This is apparently a signal to the invitees to the meeting that
it will begin.

Everyone - journalists and those invited to the meeting - are now following the
man in the suit along the concourse as we make our way to terminal E and D.

In the email invite to the meeting, the lawyers and rights activists were
apparently told that a man with a G9 sign would lead them to the meeting.

13.36 Tom Parfitt, our Moscow correspondent, who is in the middle of the media
crowd at Moscow's Sheremetyevointernationalairport, has called in this update:

There's a huge scrum of reporters here - I would estimate at least 200 in the
arrivals hall of terminal F. Several of the invitees to the Snowden meeting have
already arrived.

Genri Reznik, one of Russia's most famous human rights lawyers who recently
defended the media tycoon Alexander Lebedev, thought that it was possible that
Snowden may ask for political asylum in Russia and that this would be a logical
thing to do.

Vyacheslav Nikonov, a senior pro-Kremlin MP said that he believed that Russia's
offer of asylum to Snowden still stood on conditions imposed by President Putin
that he should stop harming "our US partners".

Journalists crowd inside the terminal F of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport

13.25 Peter Wilson from Foreign Policy briefs Snowden on what he needs to know
about living in Venezuela, where petrol costs 1p a gallon but you may have
problems buying a new car :

We're in the 15th year of a revolution that late President Hugo Chávez began in
1999. Yes, extreme poverty has been reduced as his supporters claim, but that
has been accomplished at a cost.

The economy is gutted. The government has expropriated dozens of private
companies whose production always seems to fall after their seizure. Today,
while walking in my neighbourhood, I saw long lines of people stretching out of
a government-owned supermarket. They were waiting to buy cooking oil, sugar,
chicken - simple staple goods. Food shortages are common. Pack a comfortable
pair of shoes if you want to buy coffee, meat, flour, cornmeal, or pasta.

13.08 The New York Times has a good piece on the diplomatic lengths the Obama
administration has gone to, to press Latin American countries to reject Snowden
:

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. took the unusual step of telephoning
President Rafael Correa of Ecuador to urge him not to give asylum to Mr. Snowden
. Senior State Department officials have also pushed Venezuela, one of the three
countries offering to shelter him, with both sides keenly aware that hopes for
better ties and an exchange of ambassadors after years of tension could be on
the line.

12.52 Wikileaks has tweeted their solidarity for Snowden . Julian Assange, holed
up in Ecuador's London embassy, along with Richard Stallman, the software
freedom activist and founder of the GNU project.

Twitter: WikiLeaks - Photo: Richard Stallman (left) Edward Snowden (center)
Julian Assange (right) "YES WE CAN" (last night) http://t.co/ZZKiVjunIU

12.45 Possible Snowden sighting.

Twitter: Phil Tonks - Great.Edward Snowden is holed up in our mess room toilet
and declared it "The People's Republic of Stourbridge Jcn".Break ruined.

12.36 Simon Shuster of Time magazine says that while the official story is
Snowden is in Sheremetyevo airport, few experts believe that to be true.

He says: "The accepted wisdom, unofficially acknowledged by most Western and
Russian sources, is that Snowden was taken soon after his arrival - if not
immediately - to a secure location run by some arm of the Russian government."

So [KGB colonel Oleg] Gordievsky believes Snowden would have gotten roughly the
same treatment that the KGB spy got back in 1985. "They would have fed him
something to loosen his tongue," Gordievsky says by phone from the U.K., where
he has been living in exile for nearly three decades. "Many different kinds of
drugs are available, as I experienced for myself." Having been called back to
Moscow, Gordievsky says his KGB comrades drugged him with a substance that
"turned out his lights" and made him "start talking in a very animated way."
Although the drug wiped out most of his memory of the incident, the parts he did
recollect horrified him the following morning, when he woke up feeling ill. "I
realized that I had completely compromised myself," he says.

12.05 Tom Parfitt has a few people you can follow on Twitter for the latest on
Snowden. They all appear to be Moscow correspondents who will spend their day at
the airport.

Twitter: Tom Parfitt - Peope to follow on Edward Snowden at Sheremetyevo:
@LidKelly@alessaprentice@KiritRadia_ABC@TanyaLokshina@obk@shaunwalker7@ASLuhn

12.00 One of our readers has turned citizen sleuth for us and checked whether he
was hiding nearby.

Twitter: Jonathan P Ede - Just checked and Edward #Snowden is not hiding in the
toilets at work. #FindSnowden

11.55 Tom Parfitt says reporters are starting to arrive at Sheremetyevo ahead of
Snowden's planned meeting with human rights activists and Russian officials,
scheduled for 2pm British time.

For many of us it's a familiar scene after past stake-outs and midnight
skulkings in terminals D, E and F looking for the American whistleblower.

Nobody has seen Snowden here in the flesh despite him reportedly being in the
airport's transit and departure zone since June 23rd, when he flew in from Hong
Kong in the wake of his revelations about controversial US surveillance
programmes. There's a sense of excitement that Snowden may finally break cover
mixed with suspicion that this may yet prove to be another wiild goose chase.

Colleagues are discussing where to station themselves in order to see the
fugitive leaker. It's thought that the officials coming to see him will be met
in the arrivals area of Terminal F and then escorted through to the transit
zone. For ordinary mortals like us the only way into the transit zone is to buy
a ticket on a flight - and it's a rigmarole to extract yourself afterwards
because you need to get the exit stamp in your passport annulled; something the
increasing jaded immigration officials here are not in a hurry with.

I had a chat on the phone with Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch, one of
Snowden's invitees. She was initially sceptical of the note she received but
finally decided to attend, just in case. She's on her way here.

There's been some analysis of the email puportedly sent by Snowden to his
invitees: it seems an odd mix of British and American English, with a couple of
phrases that look like awkward translations from Russian. Perhaps that reflects
a collaboration between Snowden, his British companion, Sarah Harrison of
WikiLeaks, and the Russian officials who have helped keep the whistleblower
hidden in a private area of the transit zone for the past three weeks.

It will be interesting to see how much is done on the Russian side to facilitate
this meeting. President Vladimir Putin earlier insisted that Snowden is not high
on his agenda, saying the leaker must decide his own fate. But if the Kremlin -
which is likely overseeing all of this - helps him advance a claim for asylum
via today's meeting then that will go down badly in Washington.

I've seen no heightened security yet in a brief patrol along the concourse of
Terminal F, but I'm now heading out for another look...

11.50 Aviation experts have advised if Snowden makes a run for it, he fly
commercial.

Commercial carriers have the freedom to use airspace of other countries, known
as the First Freedom of the air, the centrepiece of a complex but
well-established system that keeps global air transportation running smoothly,
according to Reuters.

Simon Phippard, of British-based law firm Bird & Bird, told the news agency:

One of the principles of the Chicago Convention system is that commercial
carriers have the right of overflight, or the right to do things like stop for
fuel, without seeking permission from the country over which they are flying.

11.44 Snowden is on the run because he exposed the surveillance programmes of
the America's National Security Agency. The fallout is still being felt.

Last night, the tech giant Microsoft was forced to defend itself against renewed
claims it have intelligence agencies widespread access to its data systems,
including assisting the National Security Agency to read encrypted messages on
Outlook.com

Peter Foster, our US editor wrote :

An internal intelligence community newsletter provided by the whistleblower
Edward Snowden and published by the Guardian purportedly revealed "deep and
ongoing" co-operation between Microsoft and the NSA and other agencies, the
paper claimed.

Among the claims noted in the newsletter, which was marked "Top Secret", was
that Microsoft had collaborated closely with the NSA and FBI to provide access
to its Outlook.com messaging system and its Skydrive cloud storage system.

However Microsoft defended itself against the suggestion that it had given
blanket back-door access to the security agencies, saying in a statement to The
Guardian that it provided customer data to government "only in response to legal
processes".

The newsletters cited by The Guardian do not appear to contradict that
statement, but do show Microsoft co-operating extensively with agencies to
enable them to gather material if and when a warrant was produced.

In one entry it was noted that the FBI Data Intercept Technology Unit (DITU)
team is "working with Microsoft to understand an additional feature in
Outlook.com which allows users to create email aliases", while another from
April this year said the FBI and Microsoft had worked together on a different
issue for "many months".

11.25 A Telegraph reader, @GeneralBoles must have voted that Snowden is in the
US in our poll. He's come across this.

11.20 Tom Parfitt has arrived at Sheremetyevo. He's checking the restaurants to
see if Snowden is having some lunch. Snowden's diet in the last three weeks must
have disintegrated if all he's had to eat is airport fare.

Twitter: Tom Parfitt - Arrived at Sheremetyevo. No sign of Snowden in TFI
Friday's. Does he get grilled salmon w/ Jack Daniels sauce delivered to his
hideout?

11.03 Telegraph reader Veritas has taken umbridge with our description of him as
a whistleblower, calling him a traitor instead.

He is NOT a whistleblower. He is a thief and a traitor. The Russians should
demonstrate they deserve to be part of the civilised world and hand over Snowden
to the USA so he can face justice.

11.00 The US has told China it was upset they did not hand over Snowden after he
fled to Hong Kong, say the decision undermined relations.

According to William Burns, deputy secretary of state, one of the main US
officials in the talks, Barack Obama and his Chinese counterpart had agreed at
their summit last month in California to cooperate over problems.

That is why we were very disappointed with how the authorities in Beijing and
Hong Kong handled the Snowden case, which undermined our effort to build the
trust needed to manage difficult issues.

We have made clear that China's handling of this case was not consistent with
the spirit of Sunnylands or with the type of relationship - the new model - that
we both seek to build.

10.51 A Russian official of Amnesty International says he plans to meet with
Snowden . It appears unclear however if Human Rights Watch will head to this
press conference at the airport.

10.36 Twitter user Spencer Saffer gives us a possible clue on Snowden's
whereabouts.

Twitter: Spencer Saffer - @Telegraph last seen here.
#wheressnowdenhttp://t.co/eyetKLx9Va

10.29 Alex Spillius, the Telegraph's Diplomatic Correspondent, says that the
chances of Edward Snowden reaching any of the countries that have offered him
asylum, are pretty difficult . To fly a Gulfstream 550, one of the few planes
that could make the distance, would cost between £150,000 to £200,000 alone.

Assuming his travel documents from Venezuela are in order, Snowden could head
north into the Barents Sea and then take a sharp turn southwest to the east or
west of Iceland. It would then head all the way down across the Atlantic Ocean,
carefully avoiding Canadian airspace near Newfoundland, and on to the Venezuelan
capital.

In the final stages the young American's pilot would have to pick his way
gingerly between Caribbean islands such as Grenada and Trinidad, never
forgetting that under international rules national airspace extends 12 nautical
miles offshore and that the US could force his plane to land based on
extradition treaties with friendly countries. Remember that the US compelled the
president of Bolivia's plane to make an unscheduled stop in Vienna when it
suspected Snowden was on board.

10.19 George Takei, he of Star Trek fame, may be on to something.

Twitter: George Takei - Overheard: Perhaps Snowden should go where US law
enforcement will never reach--Wall Street

10.13 Tom Parfitt, our Moscow correspondent, who, like Snowden has effectively
made Sheremetyevo airport a second home, has been forwarded a message that
"Edward Snowden" sent human rights groups. He says it looks suspiciously like it
has not been written by a native speaker and may be a hoax. The email claims
that Snowden will hold a press conference at 5pm Moscow time (that's 2pm
London). I'll let you be the judge.

I have been extremely fortunate to enjoy and accept many offers of support and
asylum from brave countries around the world. These nations have my gratitude,
and I hope to travel to each of them to extend my personal thanks to their
people and leaders.

By refusing to compromise their principles in the face of intimidation, they
have earned the respect of the world.

Unfortunately, in recent weeks we have witnessed an unlawful campaign by
officials in the US Government to deny my right to seek and enjoy this asylum
under Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

The scale of threatening behavior is without precedent: never before in history
have states conspired to force to the ground a sovereign President's plane to
effect a search for a political refugee. This dangerous escalation represents a
threat not just to the dignity of Latin America or my own personal security, but
to the basic right shared by every living person to live free from persecution.

I invite the Human Rights organizations and other respected individuals
addressed to join me on 12 July at 5:00PM at Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow for
a brief statement and discussion regarding the next steps forward in my
situation. Your cooperation and support will be greatly appreciated in this
matter.

Sincerely,

Edward Joseph Snowden

10.05 We've got to the stage now where every flight from Moscow to Havana is
being watched. Last night, there was a flurry of excitement after an Aeroflot
plane was taking a more southerly route across the Atlantic - possibly to avoid
US airspace. In the end... nothing.

10.00 BST, 13.00 Moscow, 17.00 Beijing 05.00 Caracas and Washington DC Good
morning, and welcome to our latest coverage of Edward Snowden. We will attempt
to keep tabs on the world's most famous fugitive and his whereabouts.

But we need your help. So please send us all suggestions.

Where is Edward Snowden?

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              168 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                      July 13, 2013 Saturday 12:03 AM GMT

Obama speaks direct to Putin about Edward Snowden as whistleblower seeks
temporary asylum in Russia;
The American whistleblower Edward Snowden has sought asylum in Russia, in his
first encounter with the outside world since becoming marooned at a Moscow
airport three weeks ago during a globe-trotting flight from charges of
espionage.

BYLINE: By Tom Parfitt Moscow

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 830 words


His move prompted President Barack Obama to pick up the phone and call Russian
President Vladimir Putin directly, presumably to demand the return of the
30-year-old former analyst at the National Security Agency, who came from
nowhere last month to trigger one of the biggest intelligence leaks in American
history.

Jay Carney, the White House spokesman, warned Russia against allowing Mr Snowden
a "propaganda platform" by letting him stay in the country. No exact details of
the conversation have been disclosed, but Snowden was among the topics the
leaders discussed, with security relations and counterterrorism preparations for
the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi also discussed covered.

Caey said such granting Snowden asylum would "run counter" to Moscow's
assurances that it did not want the affair to harm US-Russia relations. He
renewed Washington's call on Russia to expel Mr Snowden so that he could be
returned to American soil to face trial for leaking US national security
secrets.

There were chaotic scenes after Mr Snowden invited human rights groups and
senior Russian officials to meet him at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, where he
has been trapped in a closed area of the transit zone since he flew in from Hong
Kong on June 23 with the US authorities closing in.

At least 200 television camera operators and reporters stampeded through
Terminal F to see a group of about ten human rights activits, lawyers and at
least one Russian MP ushered through a door marked "staff only". The guests were
transported by bus to a meeting with Mr Snowden, who was accompanied by the
British WikiLeaks activist, Sarah Harrison, who has been with him for several
weeks.

"Hello. My name is Ed Snowden. A little over one month ago, I had family, a home
in paradise, and I lived in great comfort," the fugitive told his guests,
according to a transcript published later by WikiLeaks.

He declared he had no regrets about exposing details of "massive, pervasive
surveillance" by US intelligence agencies, but that he was forced to apply for
"temporary political asylum" in Russia while he secured an onward route to Latin
America, where he hoped to seek final refuge, despite having no passport.

"Individual citizens have the duty to violate domestic laws to prevent crimes
against peace and humanity from occurring," Mr Snowden said.

"Accordingly, I did what I believed right and began a campaign to correct this
wrongdoing. I did not seek to enrich myself. I did not seek to sell US secrets.
I did not partner with any foreign government to guarantee my safety. Instead, I
took what I knew to the public, so what affects all of us can be discussed by
all of us in the light of day, and I asked the world for justice."

Mr Snowden's request for refuge gained immediate support from some senior
Russian political figures - including Sergei Naryshkin, the speaker of the lower
house of parliament - and the Kremlin indicated his application would be
reviewed.

A shaky video of the airport meeting showed the 30-year-old former National
Security Agency contractor leaker smiling broadly and joking "I've heard this
many times" as a tannoy flight announcement interrupted his speech.

Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch's Moscow bureau, who was among those who
attended the 45-minute meeting, told The Daily Telegraph afterwards that the
American appeared in good health.

"He said that he was about to file a formal asylum claim with the Russian
authorities," she said.

Mr Snowden was asked whether he would meet Vladimir Putin's condition for
staying in Russia that Mr Snowden did nothing to "harm our American partners",
which was issued when the American made an earlier less public application.

"Snowden said that he did not find the condition problematic because Putin said
he would be ready to give him asylum in the case that he stopped damaging
Russia's partners," said Ms Lokshina. "And in his [Snowden's] perception
whatever he has done and is planning to do does not harm the United States. He
stressed that he did not want to do harm, that he wanted the US to succeed and
do well."

Other attendees said Snowden had made it clear his eventual destination was
Latin America, where Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia have offered him asylum -
and asked his guests to help pressure the US and European states not to impede
his travel there.

Washington has urged countries whose airspace Mr Snowden might have to cross not
to offer any assistance, as well as his possible final destinations.

Ms Lokshina revealed that before the meeting she had received a phone call from
a representative of the US embassy in Moscow, asking her to pass on a message
from US Ambassador Michael McFaul to Mr Snowden that "he's no whistleblower,
that he broke the law and should be held accountable".

When he heard the message, Mr Snowden responded that he was not surprised, and
that he "definitely viewed himself as a whistleblower who had revealed
information of very significant public interest".

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              169 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday

Snowden seeks temporary stay in Russia;
Whistleblower tells activists it's just a stopover before asylum in Latin
America

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 834 words


You can hide but you can't run.

In the end it's come down to this for whistleblower Edward Snowden, adrift in
the transit zone at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, one step ahead of his
American pursuers.

On Friday, Snowden told a group of human rights advocates that he would
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/edward-snowden
-says-he-will-seek-asylum-in-russia/2013/07/12/424ea976-eb11-11e2-a301-ea5a8116d
211_gallery.html#photo=1temporarily seek asylumEND in Russia as a stopover
before heading to one of the Latin American countries that have offered him
refuge.

"He was not at all nervous," said Sergei Nikitin, who heads Amnesty
International's Moscow office and was the first to meet Snowden. "He was in good
spirits, considering the situation he's in."

Snowden, who's without travel papers, has been living in the airport's transit
hotel for the past two weeks, Nikitin said. Since leaving Hong Kong, he has been
in limbo, with virtually no possibility of escape.

On the run from the world's most powerful country - which has
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/2013/07/edward-snowden.htmlcharged him with
espionageEND for leaking the massive electronic spying programs of the National
Security Agency to the media - Snowden is caught in a diplomatic deadlock
between conflicting domestic and international laws, national threats and
rivalries.

Q: Snowden withdrew his original application for asylum in Russia when President
Vladimir Putin imposed the condition that Snowden would have to stop doing
"harm" to the U.S. Will Moscow now take him in?

A: "The very fact that this meeting took place, with a combination of
high-ranking authorities, including an MP, two lawyers and the Russian
ombudsman, means that everything will go well for him," Nikitin predicts. "The
Russian authorities aren't afraid of the U.S. They do everything they want to
do, quite ruthlessly, on their own terms."

On Friday Putin had a
http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/afp/130712/obama-call-putin-over-snowden
-affaircall from President Barack ObamaEND concerning Snowden's bid for asylum.
A White House spokesman called Snowden's meeting with human rights groups a
"propaganda platform."

Q: Why can't Snowden just get on a plane for Cuba, then Venezuela, Nicaragua or
Bolivia? They all agreed to harbour him.

A: First, he has no passport - Washington cancelled his American papers. Second,
he'd almost certainly have to pass through the air space of Washington's
European allies, who are on red alert for a geeky-looking guy with glasses. Last
week the Bolivian president's plane was
http://www.thestar.com/news/world/2013/07/03/edward_snowden
_rumours_force_bolivian_presidents_plane_to_detour.htmlbarred from flying over
four European countriesEND on suspicion that he was travelling with Snowden.

Q: How would any country know he's flying over them?

A: "Air space is sovereign," explains Stuart Hendin, an Ottawa-based
international humanitarian law expert. "Every carrier has a passenger manifest
before it leaves the ground. Many countries ask for the manifest. If they have
an arrest warrant and extradition treaty in place with the U.S., they could stop
him."

Q: So there's no escape route for Snowden?

A: The Washington Post's Max Fisher sized up
"http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/2013/07/09/snowdens
-five-dubious-options-for-getting-to-venezuela/five dubious optionsEND" for
getting from Moscow to Venezuela, none of them safe or easy. The best would be
sneaking into Havana under a false name and then catching a connecting flight.
But that could jeopardize Cuba's slowly thawing relations with the U.S. Other
routes would require unfeasibly long flights, some by chartered jet.

Q: But isn't all the fuss because Snowden is facing serious U.S. criminal
charges?

A: "Secrecy laws based on concepts of state security can never be used to cover
up a country's crimes or human rights violations," says Widney Brown, Amnesty's
senior international law and policy director. "In the U.S. the
http://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/fourth_amendmentFourth AmendmentEND (of
the Constitution) applies to both privacy and unreasonable search and seizure.
The NSA's violation of presumption of privacy is so gross that it would trump
any confidentiality agreement you might make when you join an organization."

Q: Does Snowden have any support under international law?

A: Yes, says Brown. "It's clear that the U.S. is violating Snowden's
http://www.un.org/cyberschoolbus/humanrights/declaration/14.aspright to seek
asylumEND, and so are European governments. The Russian government is also at
fault for saying it would grant him asylum if he gives up his right to freedom
of expression. You can't grant asylum on those grounds."

Q: If Snowden takes refuge in Russia, what kind of treatment would he get?

A: Russia is no haven for human rights, says Nikitin. "Here we have a country
that violates human rights, but gladly gives shelter to someone who says the
U.S. is a human rights violator."

With files from Star wire services

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Edward Snowden held a news conference Friday at Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport, where he remains in limbo. Tanya Lokshina/Human Rights Watch

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                 Copyright 2013 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited


                              170 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Snowden to seek asylum in Russia

BYLINE: Will Englund

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1279 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - The fugitive document-leaker Edward Snowden surfaced, even if behind
closed doors, at Sheremetyevo International Airport on Friday afternoon, and in
announcing to a group of visitors that he plans to seek asylum in Russia, he
ensured that a problem neither Moscow nor Washington wants is not about to go
away.

Snowden had hoped to go to Latin America, but as that prospect has come to
appear more difficult, he is facing the more immediate challenge of getting out
of the airport after nearly three weeks there. He told his guests that he sees
Russian asylum as a short-term solution, in hopes that he can later make his way
to Venezuela, Nicaragua or Bolivia, which have offered him asylum.

Russia has been ambivalent at best about his presence here, as an unwelcome
complication in already strained relations with the United States. But by late
evening, Russian authorities seemed to be making the best of a difficult
situation, as a line of officials sought out the media and voiced their support
for asylum.

If asylum is granted, the Obama administration would be forced to decide how to
react without ruining relations with Moscow entirely.

Snowden told his guests, they reported afterward, that he likes Sheremetyevo
Airport well enough but that he can't stay cooped up forever. Russian officials
said it may take them two or three more weeks to decide.

Snowden has been out of public sight since he arrived here from Hong Kong on
June 23, a step ahead of American efforts to have him sent back to the United
States for revealing classified information about data collection programs run
by the National Security Agency.

But Thursday night he sent e-mail invitations to a group of defense lawyers,
pro-Kremlin politicians and human rights advocates to meet him the next day at
the airport. There he read a statement critical of the United States and told
them of his hopes for Russian asylum.

And in a comment that seemed to raise more questions than answers, he repeated
claims that as an NSA contractor, he "had the capability without any warrant to
search for, seize and read your communications. Anyone's communications at any
time."

The White House said in a statement Friday that President Obama and Russian
President Vladimir Putin spoke by phone about Snowden's status and "a range of
security and bilateral issues."

Until now, Russia has been eager not to prolong Snowden's stay, though it has
been unwilling to return him to the United States. Moscow's relations with
Washington are complicated enough, politicians here have said, without a
professed whistleblower and fugitive from prosecution standing between them.

"I do not want a human fate to hinge on the relations between two countries,"
said Vladimir Lukin, Russia's human rights commissioner and a participant in the
meeting, "but at the same time it would be undesirable if relations between two
countries hinged on one man's will."

The Kremlin insisted again that if he is to stay, Snowden must agree "to fully
stop activities causing damage to our American partners and Russian-American
relations," in the words of Dmitri Peskov, Putin's spokesman.

Snowden told his visitors that he has no problem meeting that condition, said
Tatyana Lokshina of Human Rights Watch, because he believes he has not caused
any harm to the United States with his revelations.

It's not clear the Kremlin would be in line with those semantics. "As far as we
know, he has considered and continues to consider himself a human rights
champion and a defender of the rule of law and democracy and that he did not
plan to abandon these activities," Peskov said at a briefing.

"He is a patriot of his country," said Vyacheslav Nikonov, a member of
parliament from the ruling United Russia party and the grandson of Vyacheslav
Molotov, who was the Soviet foreign minister under Joseph Stalin.

Nikonov said he thinks Snowden will have to remain at the airport while his
request - which has yet to be filed - is considered. The meeting Friday was
repeatedly interrupted by flight announcements, he said, and Snowden joked, "I'm
used to that by now."

'Not a whistleblower'

Lokshina reported that Snowden feels safe at the airport, but it has become
clear he "couldn't stay indefinitely." On her way to the meeting, she got a
phone call from a U.S. diplomat who, she said, asked her to relay to Snowden
that the United States does not consider him a whistleblower - a category that
has a fairly precise legal definition.

State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki denied that human rights representatives
had been asked to convey a message to Snowden. "At no point did . . . any
official from the U.S. government ask anyone to convey a message to Mr. Snowden
," she said.

The State Department expressed "disappointment" that Russia allowed human rights
activists into the airport transit zone "despite the government's declaration of
Russia's neutrality."

"Our concern here is that he's been provided with this opportunity to speak in a
propaganda platform . . . that Russia has played a role in facilitating this,
that others have helped elevate it," Psaki said.

Snowden, she said, is "not a whistleblower. He's not a human rights activist.
He's wanted on a series of serious criminal charges brought in the Eastern
District of Virginia in the United States."

In the statement he read from at the meeting, Snowden attacked the "historically
disproportionate aggression" of the United States in trying to prevent his
access to asylum in Venezuela, Bolivia or Nicaragua, according to a transcript
provided by WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy organization that is helping him.

"I believe," he said, after talking about his revelations, "in the principle
declared at Nuremberg in 1945: 'Individuals have international duties which
transcend the national obligations of obedience. Therefore individual citizens
have the duty to violate domestic laws to prevent crimes against peace and
humanity from occurring.' "

Snowden said he was formally accepting "all offers of support or asylum I have
been extended and all others that may be offered in the future." He cited, for
example, Venezuela's offer of asylum, but he said that "some governments" in
Western Europe and North America were interfering with his "right to enjoy that
asylum," making it impossible for him to travel.

Several Latin American leaders have accused the United States of pressuring
European countries to keep Snowden from reaching the region, including an
incident in which Bolivian President Evo Morales's plane was apparently
prevented from crossing the airspace of some European nations on suspicion that
Snowden was hiding aboard.

The scene at the airport

Snowden's visitors gathered at 4:30 p.m. in the arrivals hall of the airport's
Terminal F, a dingy, aging relic of the Soviet era. They were mobbed by
television camera crews, starved of a glimpse of Snowden for the past 19 days.
Then airport officials led them on a long march past tourists just in from
Thailand, right by a restaurant called Franklin's Roll & Burger displaying a
large American flag, up one escalator and down another, until they reached the
gleaming Terminal E.

Down to the ground floor, into a back area nearly empty except for a woman
placidly embroidering, then along a long blank pale green wall, to a door marked
"Staff Only." The airport had set up a meeting room that allowed the visitors
not to cross passport control, from their side, or Snowden from his. A hot,
jostling mob of journalists waited while the meeting took place. Then they
pounced when the visitors re-emerged.

will.englund@washpost.com

Kathy Lally and Natasha Abbakumova in Moscow and Karen DeYoung in Washington
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              193 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                              July 12, 2013 Friday

Amnesty official in Russia plans to meet Snowden

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 310 words


MOSCOW (AP) A Russian official of Amnesty International says he plans to meet
with Edward Snowden, the leaker of U.S. National Security Agency secrets.

Sergei Nikitin, head of the rights organization"s Russia office, told The
Associated Press the meeting would take place Friday, but he declined to say
where. However, the head of the Moscow lawyers" association, Genri Reznik, was
quoted by the Interfax news agency as saying the meeting has been called for
4:30 p.m. (1230 GMT) at Moscow"s Sheremetyevo international airport.

Snowden is believed to have been stuck in the transit zone at Sheremetyevo as he
negotiates for asylum in another country.

Russian news agencies reported that Snowden had called on several organizations,
among them Transparency International and Human Rights Watch, to meet with him
at the airport. Reznik told Interfax that he had also received the invitation
and would try to go.

The deputy head of HRW"s Moscow office, Tatiana Loshkina, was quoted by Russian
news agencies as saying it was unclear if she would go to the meeting. Phone
calls to Transparency International went unanswered.

Snowden has not been seen in public since arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong,
where he had fled before his leaks about American Internet surveillance were
made public.

Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia have said they would be willing to grant asylum
to Snowden. But it is unclear if Snowden could fly from Moscow to any of those
countries without passing through the airspace of the United States or allied
countries.

Reznik, the lawyer, said he expected Snowden called for the meeting in order to
seek asylum in Russia.

Snowden made an earlier application for Russian asylum. But Russian President
Vladimir Putin said asylum would be conditional on Snowden stopping leaking U.S.
secrets; Snowden then withdrew his asylum bid, Russian officials said.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              195 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                        July 12, 2013 Friday 5:45 PM GMT

Edward Snowden striving to keep his options open;
Now that Edward Snowden has shown his hand, Damien McElroy assesses his options
and where he can go from here.

BYLINE: By Damien McElroy Foreign Affairs Correspondent

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 413 words


What are Edward Snowden's options?

Edward Snowden has one overriding objective to ensure that he never faces a US
court on charges of betraying his homeland. However his route to safety appears
blocked by US determination to intercept his flight. Legal experts in support of
Mr Snowden believe he has a strong case under international law to claim asylum
as he engaged in a form of "protected speech," exposing unlawful behaviour by
his government.

What is temporary asylum? Is it even a concept that can protect him?

By claiming that he only wants a provisional form of asylum in Russia, Mr
Snowden is attempting to preserve his preferred option of moving to South
American. But in theory refugee status should be recognised and granted by the
first country that the applicant reaches. However the political dividing lines
that have been drawn up around Snowden should allow him to establish and
maintain the other claims on offer.

Where will Snowden live in the immediate future?

Launching some form of asylum process in Russia would ensure that he could leave
the airport and move into a house in Russia until he can be sure that he would
reach his final destination. But President Vladimir Putin has sounded sceptical
on Mr Snowden's pleas for protection, announcing that he cannot harm America
while in Russia.

Does that mean that the flow of revelations will now dry up?

While Mr Snowden has said that he does not want to harm America, he has not
given a blanket assurance that he will repudiate his whistle-blowing activities.
In any case the choice may no longer rest with him. Glenn Greenwald, the US
journalist who collaborated with Snowden has the files at his home and this week
declared it would take him "months" to work through the data for more leaks.

How can Snowden reach his preferred place of exile in South America?

The laws of sea and air do not differ significantly in limiting the reach of the
US. In practice Snowden would have to find a direct route that neither crosses
the long list of close US allies or encroaches on US airspace. If he does not
mind spending time in a European prison, it may be that he chooses to fight
extradition in the EU courts once his refugee status is established. Victory in
court would mean he could travel on to South America.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              198 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                             July 11, 2013 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Pressure on stranded Snowden;
United States - WikiLeaks Flight of fancy

BYLINE: Paul McGeough Chief Correspondent, Washington

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 463 words


The silence is deafening. Here we are, Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia all say
they will take Edward Snowden and the Russians are telling him to push off - but
the 30-year-old who leaked Washington's surveillance secrets to the world is
saying nothing.

There was a flurry of activity on Tuesday when a garbled report from Moscow said
that he had opted for Venezuela. And that dovetailed - too neatly - with a
WikiLeaks tweet, announcing that the "first phase of Edward Snowden's Flight of
Liberty" campaign would be launched on Wednesday.

Could mean anything. But it is fair to conclude that with the Russians wanting
to shut down the Moscow episode of the Snowden roadshow, the former computer
systems administrator needs to move.

This is not as simple as getting from A to B. Or as the Irishman standing on a
street corner told the American who asked for directions to the Post Office:

"I wouldn't start from here."

If we accept Snowden is still at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport
then, on the surface at least, he's in luck - there are direct flights between
the Russian capital and Havana, Cuba, from where the man described in US
extradition applications as "a fugitive who is currently in Russia" could take a
regional flight to his final destination.

But last week, the world witnessed the extent to which Washington will go to
capture Snowden.

France, Portugal, Spain and Italy all caved to US pressure, blocking Bolivian
leader Evo Morales' presidential jet because, as Spanish Foreign Minister Jose
Manuel Garcia-Margallo told Spanish TV: "They told us that the information was
clear, that [Snowden] was inside."

So, if Washington is willing to scramble the homebound travel of a national
leader, forcing his pilot to backtrack to Vienna, where Austrian officials
allowed him to land only if they could search the aircraft - which failed to
turn up Snowden - what might it do if it was told that Snowden was on a
commercial flight?

This is an important question, because quite apart from what any European
government might do by way of ordering a pilot to land, the Moscow-Havana
flights also go through American airspace.

That's a hell of a game of chicken to be playing at an altitude of 10,000
metres. In the circumstances, would any airline executive allow the issue of a
ticket to Snowden? And we know that Washington would not think twice about
acting to ground any private jet it believes is carrying Snowden - ask Bolivia's
Morales.

The betting is that Snowden will head to Venezuela. Nicaraguan President Daniel
Ortega seemed half-hearted in offering Snowden asylum.

Much to the chagrin of Washington, Hong Kong allowed Snowden to board a
commercial flight to Moscow on June 23, since when he has been "marooned" in the
airport transit lounge.

Or so we are told.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Fugitive: Edward Snowden needs to make a move.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              199 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                             July 11, 2013 Thursday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Snowden likely to head for Caracas

BYLINE: BEN HOYLE, MOSCOW

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 499  words


EDWARD Snowden's next move from his Moscow airport hideaway looked clearer
yesterday after a senior Russian MP said the fugitive whistleblower had agreed
to accept asylum in Venezuela.

Alexei Pushkov said Mr Snowden regarded the offer of sanctuary in Caracas as the
``most reliable'' option.

Venezuela's offer was one of three positive responses from Latin American
countries to Mr Snowden's asylum applications. Venezuelan President Nicolas
Maduro said this week that Mr Snowden was being ``being persecuted by the empire
(the US)'' and urged him to ``come here''.

But nothing in the extraordinary story of Mr Snowden's flight from the clutches
of US law enforcement has proved straightforward, particularly since he arrived
in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo airport outside Moscow last month without a
valid passport or a Russian visa.

It looked as if the former National Security Agency contractor's diplomatic
limbo may be resolving itself when Mr Pushkov, head of the international affairs
committee for Russia's lower house of parliament, took to Twitter yesterday.
``As was expected, Snowden agreed to Maduro's offer of political asylum,'' he
tweeted.

The tweet was deleted 30 minutes later. Soon afterwards, Mr Pushkov said his
information had come from Vesti, the state news network -- which was by now
running the story of Mr Snowden's acceptance of Venezuela's offer, citing Mr
Pushkov as its source.

Conspiracy theorists suggested Mr Pushkov had jumped the gun on a genuine
announcement and had been ordered to retract his initial statement.

What has become increasingly clear, though, is that 18 days after his arrival,
the Russian government is keen to nudge Mr Snowden, 30, towards the departure
gate.

On Monday, Mr Maduro called on Mr Snowden to decide whether he wanted to fly to
Caracas. ``We have received the asylum request letter,'' he said after he
offered Mr Snowden asylum, as did the leaders of Bolivia and Nicaragua. Mr
Maduro described the offers from the three nations as ``collective humanitarian
political asylum''.

If Mr Snowden does accept asylum in Venezuela, he still has to reach the
country, a task that looks considerably more complicated after the aircraft in
which Bolivian President Evo Morales was returning to South America from Moscow
last week was diverted and eventually forced to land in Austria because of
rumours Mr Snowden was on board.

There are no direct flights between Moscow and Caracas. The quickest way to get
to Venezuela would be via Havana, but Mr Snowden may be trying to work out a
route east over friendly Russian territory and then the Pacific.

Three hours after Mr Pushkov's initial tweet, WikiLeaks, which has been
assisting Mr Snowden, suggested that a deal was close but that any announcement
was premature. It said on Twitter: ``Edward #Snowden has not yet formally
accepted asylum in Venezuela. The Russian lawmaker concerned has deleted the
tweet. The states concerned will make the announcement if and when the
appropriate time comes.''

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              200 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             July 11, 2013 Thursday

Russian commentary says Snowden case shows limits of US influence

LENGTH: 977 words


Text of report by the website of government-owned Russian newspaper Rossiyskaya
Gazeta on 10 July

[Yevgeniy Shestakov report headlined: Snowden Passed from Hand to Hand - Former
CIA employee stripped America of superpower status"]

Snowden made it clear to America that it can no longer lay claim to the title of
"superpower". Thanks to the fugitive CIA employee, the world has understood that
no matter how significant Washington's influence over world events is, this does
nevertheless have its limits.

Despite the threats resounding from the halls of power in the United States, the
number of countries willing to challenge the White House is growing. According
to the latest information, Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Bolivia are offering
political asylum to the man who exposed America's secrets. Snowden had sent
asylum requests to these countries. Regarding this, Venezuelan President Nicolas
Maduro said "Snowden has done nothing except tell the truth", for which he has
been persecuted by "the most powerful empire on Earth". The Bolivian leader,
whose plane was searched just days ago at Vienna airport on suspicion that it
was being used to transport Snowden out of Russia, gave an equally emotional
response to the request from the former CIA employee. Evo Morales said: "If this
young American, persecuted by his fellow countrymen, asks us for asylum, then we
will grant him this asylum, we are not afraid of anyone."

It seems that it is not the eventual fate of the fugitive spy so much as the
lack of fear of ruining relations with Washington shown by a large proportion of
Latin American states and their willingness to defend people like Snowden and
Assange that is driving the American political elite crazy. This is because this
loss of fear of the planet's onetime leading power could trigger a chain
reaction, with America finally having to admit that it is no longer able to
control world events. And not just in the faraway East, but in its own
"underbelly" of Latin America. The case of Snowden, who has been leaking
compromising material on the US secret services unchecked for more than a month
and who has every chance of escaping from American justice, has seriously
affected the self-esteem of the American nation, even if this is not being said
openly.

The US embassy in Moscow dismissed speculation that the issue of Snowden would
affect President Barack Obama's planned visit to Russia in September and might
even lead to this visit being cancelled. The embassy, not unreasonably, thinks
that by that time the former CIA employee will probably have already left the
transit area in Sheremetyevo Airport. And so the issue of his extradition from
Russia will not cast a shadow over preparations for Obama's visit. It can be
assumed that Snowden will fly to his new place of residence in one of the Latin
American countries before the start of August - at which time, according to
Rossiyskaya Gazeta's sources, Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has a visit planned
to the United States to discuss with his American colleagues the details of the
head of the White House's visit to Moscow. Of course, Russia wants to see the
whole business of Snowden's stay in Sheremetyevo finished by this time.

However, the worldwide scandal triggered by his revelations is only getting
bigger, forcing American ambassadors around the world to try to explain
themselves and refute documents put out by the former spy. For example, the
Brazilian authorities intend to carefully investigate Snowden's information
about US espionage in Latin America and on Brazilian territory in particular.

A number of experts believe that Snowden will fly to Venezuela or Nicaragua via
Cuba. He has absolutely nothing to worry about on the Island of Freedom: Cuban
President Raul Castro announced that his country supports the sovereign right of
the countries of Latin America to offer asylum "to all those who are persecuted
for their ideals and to fighters for democracy". Havana is hard likely to deny
itself the satisfaction of "sticking two fingers up" at the Americans by
admitting Snowden, even just as a transit passenger.

How Snowden Will Fly There

After the confirmation of his request for political asylum in Venezuela, Edward
Snowden then faces the question of how he will get to Caracas.

One of Russia's leading experts on Latin America, who asked not to be named,
suggested that the option of a non-stop flight via Havana can be ruled out for
two reasons. First, Snowden himself would most likely not get on a normal
scheduled flight, if he knows that part of the route passes through US
territory. And, despite President Obama's declaration that the American security
services are not going to seize a plane carrying "some hacker", this still
cannot be ruled out. Second, Aeroflot may refuse to carry Snowden, thus joining
the list of companies who have already said that they would not sell flight
tickets to the disgraced American. And that means that it is likely Snowden will
not end up in Havana. And indeed such a "relay" would do the Cuban authorities,
who have already been trying in vain to get the US blockade on the country
lifted, no good.

In the expert's view, a more realistic and, it seems, the only opportunity for
the former US secret service employee to get to Venezuela would be the
possibility of travelling to that country onboard the Venezuelan leader's plane.
This could boost the ratings of Hugo Chavez's successor, Nicolas Maduro, who so
far has lacked the Comandante's charisma, and would show that he is capable of
taking brave and creative actions. At the same time, the expert picked a route
taking into consideration the specifics of flying over the ocean. "It would be
easier for him via China, and then to Managua or Caracas, so that he did not
have to cross US territory."

Source: Rossiyskaya Gazeta website, Moscow, in Russian 10 Jul 13

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              202 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             July 11, 2013 Thursday

Confusion on Snowden asylum acceptance

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 455 words


Associated Press

Moscow

The WikiLeaks secret-spilling site on Tuesday said NSA leaker Edward Snowden has
not yet formally accepted asylum in Venezuela, trying to put to rest growing
confusion over whether he had taken up the country's offer.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has offered asylum to Snowden and says his
country had received a request from the former NSA systems analyst. But Snowden,
who is believed to be in a Moscow airport's transit zone, has applied for asylum
in other countries as well, and it is not clear how easy it would be for him to
travel to the Latin American country.

On Tuesday, a prominent Russian lawmaker tweeted that Snowden had accepted
Venezuela's offer, then deleted the posting a few minutes later.

It was not possible to immediately reach Alexei Pushkov, the head of the Russian
parliament's foreign affairs committee who has acted as an unofficial point man
for the Kremlin on the Snowden affair.

But soon after the posting on his Twitter account disappeared, he sent another
message saying his claim was based on a report from the state all-news
television channel Rossiya 24, also known as Vesti.

The channel said Pushkov misunderstood its report on Maduro's comments on Monday
night during a meeting with Panama's president, which the anchorwoman introduced
by saying "Venezuela has finally received an answer" from Snowden.

She then clarified that Maduro had said Venezuela had received Snowden's
official request and showed a clip of him saying in Russian voiceover that
Snowden "should decide when to fly to Caracas, if he indeed has decided to come
here".

WikiLeaks, which has been advising Snowden, said Tuesday on Twitter that Snowden
had not formally accepted the Venezuelan offer, and that any decision on asylum
would be announced by the "states concerned" and "then be confirmed by us".

Pushkov, however, followed up with a third tweet that essentially repeated his
initial claim: "As Vesti 24 reported citing Maduro, Snowden accepted his offer
of asylum. If this is so, then he considered this the safest option."

Pushkov had posted messages over the weekend encouraging Snowden to accept
Venezuela's offer, signaling that the Kremlin was now anxious to be rid of him.

Snowden, who revealed details of a US intelligence programme to monitor Internet
activity, came to Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport on June 23 and was believed to
be headed for Cuba. But he did not board that flight and has not been seen
publicly since.

For Snowden to leave for Venezuela, he would need the country to issue him
travel documents and find a way to get there. The only direct commercial flight
from Moscow stops in Havana.

The Moscow-Havana flight goes over Europe and the US, which could cause
complications.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              206 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 thetimes.co.uk

                      July 10, 2013 Wednesday 12:03 AM GMT

Fugitive Edward Snowden 'ready to accept Venezuela asylum'

BYLINE: Ben Hoyle, Moscow Correspondent

SECTION: EUROPE

LENGTH: 819 words


Edward Snowden's next move from his Moscow airport hideaway looked clearer last
night after a senior Russian MP said that the fugitive whistleblower had agreed
to accept asylum in Venezuela.

Alexei Pushkov said that Mr Snowden regarded the offer of sanctuary in Caracas
as the "most reliable" option.

Venezuela's offer was one of three positive responses from Latin American
countries to Mr Snowden's asylum applications. Nicolás Maduro, the Venezuelan
President, said this week that Mr Snowden was being "being persecuted by the
empire [the United States]" and urged him to "come here".

But nothing in the extraordinary story of Mr Snowden's flight from the clutches
of American law enforcement has proved straightforward, particularly since he
arrived in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo airport outside Moscow two and a
half weeks ago with neither a valid passport nor a Russian visa.

It looked as if the former National Security Agency contractor's diplomatic
limbo might be resolving itself when Mr Pushkov, head of the international
affairs committee for the Duma, the Russian lower house of parliament, took to
Twitter yesterday evening. "As was expected, Snowden agreed to Maduro's offer of
political asylum," he tweeted. He added: "Apparently this option looked like the
most reliable one to Snowden."

The tweet was deleted 30 minutes later. Soon afterwards Mr Pushkov said his
information had come from Vesti, the state news network - which was by now
running the story of Mr Snowden's acceptance of Venezuela's offer, citing Mr
Pushkov as its source.

Conspiracy theorists suggested that Mr Pushkov had jumped the gun on a genuine
announcement and had been ordered to retract his initial statement.

President Putin's spokesman declined to comment and said that all questions
should be directed to Mr Pushkov. What has become increasingly clear, though, is
that 18 days after his arrival, the Russian Government is keen to nudge Mr
Snowden, 30, towards the departure gate. His continued presence has become
increasingly awkward for Russia, although Mr Putin has promised not to extradite
him.

On Monday President Maduro called on Mr Snowden to decide if he wanted to fly to
Caracas. "We have received the asylum request letter," Mr Maduro told reporters
after he offered Mr Snowden asylum, as did the leaders of Bolivia and Nicaragua.
Mr Maduro described the offers from the three Latin American nations as
"collective humanitarian political asylum".

If Mr Snowden does accept asylum in Venezuela he still has to reach the country,
a task that looks considerably more complicated after the aircraft in which the
Bolivian President Evo Morales was returning to South America from Moscow last
week was diverted and eventually forced down over Austria because of rumours
that Mr Snowden was on board. Bolivia accused France, Spain, Italy and Portugal
of refusing to let the jet fly through their airspace.

There are no direct flights between Moscow and Caracas. The quickest way to get
to Venezuela would be to fly via Havana, but Mr Snowden may now be trying to
work out a route east over friendly Russian territory and then the Pacific.

Three hours after Mr Pushkov's initial tweet, WikiLeaks, the whistleblowing
organisation that has been assisting Mr Snowden, suggested that a deal was close
but that any announcement was premature. On Twitter, it said: "Edward #Snowden
has not yet formally accepted asylum in Venezuela. The Russian law maker
concerned has deleted the tweet."

It added: "The states concerned will make the announcement if and when the
appropriate time comes."

Mr Snowden arrived in Moscow aboard a passenger flight from Hong Kong on June
23, travelling with a staff member of WikiLeaks. He had spent a month in the
former British colony after passing on the first instalments of what has become
one of the most significant intelligence leaks in American history, exposing the
scale and depth of US surveillance of governments and ordinary citizens all over
the world.

In an interview recorded in Hong Kong but published on Monday, Mr Snowden
described himself as a patriot who had become disillusioned with the way that
the United States is governed.

"America is a fundamentally good country," he said. "We have good people with
good values who want to do the right thing. But the structures of power that
exist are working to their own ends to extend their capability at the expense of
the freedom of all publics." He added: "I don't want to live in a world where
everything that I say, everything I do, everyone I talk to, every expression of
creativity or love or friendship, is recorded."

In his absence, the US has charged him with unauthorised disclosure of national
defence information, unauthorised disclosure of classified communication
intelligence and theft of government property. Each charge carries a maximum of
10 years' imprisonment and a fine of $250,000 (£168,500).

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTTO


                     Copyright 2013 News International Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              210 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                              The Washington Times

                            July 10, 2013 Wednesday

Venezuela acknowledges asylum request from Snowden;
WikiLeaks reports NSA leaker has not accepted offer

BYLINE: By Shaun Waterman THE WASHINGTON TIMES

SECTION: A, WORLD; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 496 words


Venezuelan officials say they have received a formal request for asylum from
National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden, who has been trapped in legal
limbo in the transit lounge of Moscow's international airport for more than two
weeks.

But the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks said Tuesday that Mr. Snowden has not yet
accepted Venezuela's - or any other country's - offer of political asylum.

Venezuelan President Nicholas Maduro in Caracas said late Monday that "an asylum
request letter arrived" from Mr. Snowden, according to Spain's EFE news agency.

Mr. Snowden himself "will have to decide when he will fly here," said Mr.
Maduro, who last Friday had offered "humanitarian asylum" to the 30-year-old
former information technology contractor.

In Moscow, Alexei Pushkov, a prominent Russian lawmaker, posted Tuesday on his
Twitter account that Mr. Snowden had accepted Venezuela's offer, but the posting
was deleted within a few minutes.

Mr. Pushkov heads the Russian parliament's foreign affairs committee and has
acted as the Kremlin's unofficial intermediary in the Snowden affair.

Soon after the posting on his Twitter account disappeared, Mr. Pushkov sent
another message saying his claim was based on a report from the state all-news
television channel Rossiya 24, also known as Vesti.

The channel said Mr. Pushkov misunderstood its report on Mr. Maduro's comments
Monday night during a meeting with Panama's president, which the anchorwoman
introduced by saying "Venezuela has finally received an answer" from Mr. Snowden
.

In an effort the clarify the matter, WikiLeaks, which has been advising Mr.
Snowden, said Tuesday on Twitter that Mr. Snowden had not formally accepted the
Venezuelan offer, and that any decision on asylum would be announced by the
"states concerned" and "then be confirmed by us."

U.S. officials have hunted for Mr. Snowden since he divulged information about
NSA's classified electronic surveillance programs last month. Authorities have
revoked Mr. Snowden's U.S. passport and requested that allies and other nations
not facilitate his onward travel, except to the United States to face trial on
espionage charges.

If he were to leave the Moscow airport, Mr. Snowden would have to do so without
passing over the airspace of the United States or that of its allies in order to
avoid capture.

Asked about possible U.S. reprisals if Venezuela were to take Mr. Snowden in,
Mr. Maduro said, "The U.S. doesn't govern the world. We're a free and sovereign
country."

Meanwhile, Mr. Snowden said that British electronic eavesdropping is even more
intense than that by the NSA, his former employer.

His comments appeared in an interview published Monday by German magazine Der
Spiegel. The interview was conducted in May, via encrypted email, before the
journalists communicating with him knew his identity, and much of the exchange
is technical in nature, designed to establish Mr. Snowden's bona fides.

This article is based in part on wire service reports.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 The Washington Times LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              211 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 9, 2013 Tuesday 08:19 PM GMT+4

Russian lawmakers says news about Snowden's accepting Venezuelan asylum offer
came from TV news

LENGTH: 268 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 9


- Alexei Pushkov, the chairman of the international committee of the Russian
State Duma lower parliament house, said on Tuesday he had learnt about NSA
leaker Edward Snowden's accepting a Venezuelan political asylum offer from a
news broadcast.

"Information about Snowden's accepting the political asylum offer from Maduro
was aired in a Vesti 24 news broadcast at 18:00. Please contact them if you have
any questions," he wrote in his Twitter blog.

Earlier, the lawmaker wrote in his Twitter blog that Snowden had accepted
Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro's offer. "Snowden predictably agreed to
Maduro's political asylum proposal. Apparently, Snowden found this option the
most reliable," Pushkov twitted.

On Monday, Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro said "we have received the asylum
request letter. He will have to decide when he flies, if he finally wants to fly
here."

"We told this young man, 'you are being persecuted by the empire /the USA/, come
here,'" Maduro said

Over the weekend, Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia all offered political asylum
to Snowden.

Edward Snowden, 30, a former CIA staffer, divulged highly classified electronic
espionage programs his agency was implementing in the USA and all over the
world. The exposure caused a scandal which is still gaining moment. Snowden went
to Hong Kong from the USA, and then flew to Moscow, in order to leave for the
state which could grant him political asylum. However, he became stranded at an
international airport in the Russian capital. According to diplomatic sources,
he is currently staying in the transit zone of the Sheremetyevo airport.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              212 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                        July 9, 2013 Tuesday 4:47 PM GMT

Edward Snowden: Russian causes confusion with Venezuela asylum tweet;
A Russian politician sparked a brief media storm claiming Edward Snowden, the US
intelligence whistleblower, had agreed to an offer of political asylum from
Venezuela, only to delete a Tweet referencing the offer minutes later.

BYLINE: By Chris Irvine

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 378 words


The former CIA and National Security Agency (NSA) computer technician has been
stranded in Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport since June 23, after flying in from
Hong Kong and having his passport revoked by US authorities.

He had sought asylum from more than 20 countries in an attempt to evade the US
justice system after exposing a vast US surveillance programme but had been thus
far rebuffed.

Alexei Pushkov, the head of the Russian lower house of parliament's
international affairs committee, initially said on Twitter: "As was expected,
Snowden agreed to ( Venezuelan President Nicolas) Maduro's offer of political
asylum.

"Apparently this option looked like the most reliable one to Snowden."

There was immediate confusion however as Mr Pushkov deleted the tweet, but not
before it had been picked up by a number of media organisations. He could not
immediately be reached for comment.

Russian observers suggested that Mr Pushkov may have interpreted a report about
Mr Snowden's earlier application to Venezuela for asylum.

President Maduro had said over the weekend that he was willing to offer Mr
Snowden asylum.

"In the name of America's dignity, I have decided to offer humanitarian asylum
to Edward Snowden. He is a young man who has told the truth, in the spirit of
rebellion, about the United States spying on the whole world," he said on
Friday.

Mr Pushkov has been an increasingly vocal presence on the Snowden affair.
Earlier he described Venezuela's offer as Mr Snowden's "last chance" to seek
political refuge .

Mr Snowden's asylum route could be fraught with difficulty as he would likely be
forced to fly over European airspace. Several European countries have already
appeared willing to shut their airspace to any aircraft that Mr Snowden was on
board.

A plane carrying Evo Morales, the Bolivian president, was last week diverted
from Moscow to Vienna                      and searched on suspicion of
harbouring Mr Snowden. It was forced to stay in Austria for 13 hours.

Angry Bolivian officials said the plane had been forced to land because France,
Portugal and Italy blocked it from flying over their territories, acting on
orders from the US, which suspected Mr Snowden was being smuggled out of Russia.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              213 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 9, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Venezuela's Maduro culls power with Snowden asylum offer

BYLINE: Juan Forero

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA


BOGOTA, Colombia - American fugitive Edward Snowden's diminishing possibilities
of remaining free to continue releasing information about secret U.S.
surveillance programs increasingly appear to hinge on Venezuela, which awaited
word Monday on whether the former National Security Agency contractor would
accept its offer of asylum and fly to the oil-rich country.

Bolivia and Nicaragua also say they could give refuge to Snowden, who is on the
run from American officials and is thought to be marooned in the vast transit
zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport. And the president of
communist Cuba, Ral Castro, on Sunday expressed support for Latin American
allies that might take in the 30-year-old computer expert, opening the
possibility that Snowden could fly through Havana as a first leg on his flight
to asylum.

Among those offering sanctuary to Snowden, anti-imperialist Venezuela stands
out: a country with an intense antipathy toward the United States and just
enough muscle to make his escape from American law enforcement a possibility. It
also appears that Russian officials, eager to end the diplomatic fallout of
having Snowden in Moscow, see their close ally, Venezuela, as offering the
clearest solution.

"The situation with Snowden is creating additional tension in relations with
Washington that are complex as they are," Alexei Pushkov, head of the foreign
affairs committee in Russia's lower house of parliament, told the newspaper
Kommersant on Monday.

Pushkov, whose comments dependably reflect the Kremlin's position on foreign
affairs, said the Snowden saga needed to be settled before President Obama
arrives in September to meet with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin. "And
judging by the way things are unfolding," Pushkov told the newspaper, "this is
how it's going to be."

Over the weekend, Pushkov had also said that giving asylum to Snowden in
Venezuela could not damage President Nicols Maduro, because his government's
relations with Washington are already in tatters. "It can't get worse," Pushkov
said in a Twitter message.

Newly elected and facing staggering economic problems at home despite the
country's oil wealth, Maduro appears to have made a high-pitched, openly hostile
position against the Obama administration a cornerstone of his government's
foreign policy. He took his most provocative stand Friday in announcing that
Venezuela would take in Snowden. On Monday, Maduro said that a letter from
Snowden requesting asylum had been received and that the young American would
simply have to decide when to fly to Caracas.

Maduro has accused the United States of fomenting protests against his
government after his disputed April 14 election victory, which gave him the
presidency his predecessor, Hugo Chvez, had held for 14 turbulent years until
his death from cancer.

The Snowden saga - a young American revealing secrets the U.S. government wants
to contain - provided the perfect opportunity for Maduro to take on the Obama
administration, said Eduardo Semtei, a former Venezuelan government official.

"To figure internationally, to show that he is a player among big powers, he
offered asylum to Snowden," said Semtei, who had been close to Chvez's brother,
Adn, a leading ideologue in the late president's radical movement. "This grabs
headlines, and it shows that he's a strong president, one with character, and
that he's capable of challenging the United States."

Maduro and Venezuela came late to the Snowden saga, as tiny Ecuador, an ally
also committed to opposing American initiatives, heaped praise on Snowden and
expressed a willingness to help him after he had flown from Hong Kong to Moscow
on June 23 to avoid American justice. WhenEcuador backed away from its initial
enthusiasm over Snowden, Venezuela stepped in last week as Maduro arrived in
Moscow for an energy summit.

The 50-year-old Maduro, who found his political calling as a socialist activist
with close ties to Cuba, took a sharply anti-imperialist stand in embracing
Snowden. He said the United States had "created an evil system, half Orwellian,
that intends to control the communications of the world," and characterized
Snowden as an antiwar activist and hero who had unmasked the dastardly plans of
America's ruling elite.

Political analysts say the opportunity to take sides against Washington was
simply irresistible for a government that has for years characterized itself as
a moral force speaking out for the weak against "the empire," as the United
States is known in Caracas. And the fact that the secrets Snowden divulged were
embarrassing to the Obama administration only gave more fuel to Venezuela,
former Venezuelan diplomats and political analysts in Caracas said.

"Edward Snowden became the symbol for the anti-imperialist rhetoric, for
progressivism, for international radicalism," said Carlos Romero, an analyst and
author who closely tracks Venezuela's international diplomacy.

Venezuela helped channel the fury of Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Uruguay and
Suriname after Bolivian President Evo Morales's plane was apparently refused
entry into the airspace of as many as four European countries last Tuesday
because of the belief that Snowden was hiding aboard. And on Monday, Venezuela's
state media apparatus seemed to take more offense than the Brazilian government
over revelations that the NSA had collected data on countless telephone and
e-mail conversations in Brazil.

But former diplomats familiar with Venezuela say that there are other aspects to
consider in deciphering Maduro's support for Snowden.

Ignacio Arcaya, a diplomat who served the Chvez government in the United States
in the early part of his presidency, said Maduro has had the challenge of trying
to ease the concerns of radicalized sectors in his movement that have been
worried about a resumption of relations with Washington now that Chvez is gone.
Indeed, until recently, Maduro was spearheading an effort at rapprochement, as
shown by a meeting in Guatemala on June 5 between Secretary of State John F.
Kerry and his Venezuelan counterpart, Elas Jaua.

"What Maduro is doing is aimed at quieting the radical sectors of his party who
think he is negotiating with the United States and think that he's talking to
private industry," Arcaya said.

Maduro also has to consider his own unstable political position after the April
14 election, which is being contested by his challenger, Henrique Capriles, who
says the vote was stolen from him. At the same time, Maduro faces millions of
Venezuelans tired of the country's sky-high inflation, rampant homicide rate and
serious shortages of everything from chicken to toilet paper.

Myles R.R. Frechette, a retired American diplomat who served in Venezuela and
other Latin American countries, said Maduro is using a tried-and-true strategy:
loudly oppose the United States to distract from domestic problems.

"It plays very well," said Frechette. "It's the card to play. It's what you've
always got in your drawer. You open your drawer and play to your most radical
elements."

foreroj@washpost.com

Will Englund in Moscow contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              214 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                              July 8, 2013 Monday
                              Correction Appended

Snowden gets 2 firm offers of sanctuary

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

Venezuela and Nicaragua extended the first firm offers of asylum to Edward J.
Snowden.

FULL TEXT


A senior member of the Russian Parliament has said that political asylum in
Venezuela would be ''the best solution'' for Edward J. Snowden, the former
intelligence contractor who is on the run from the U.S. authorities.

The comments Saturday by the Russian lawmaker, Aleksei K. Pushkov, chairman of
the international affairs committee of the State Duma, the lower house of
Parliament, came just a few hours after Venezuela and Nicaragua extended the
first firm offers of asylum to Mr. Snowden, who has been holed up at
Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow for nearly two weeks, and they seemed to reflect
the Kremlin's increasing desire to be rid of him. ''Sanctuary for Snowden in
Venezuela would be the best solution,'' Mr. Pushkov posted on Twitter. ''The
country has a sharp conflict with the United States. It will not be worse. And
he can't live in Sheremetyevo.''

In fact, the United States and Venezuela have started talks toward
reconciliation, progress that a senior Obama administration official said
Saturday would end if Venezuela sheltered Mr. Snowden, as President Nicolás
Maduro said he would, or aided his journey. The official also cautioned other
nations in Latin America, hinting that relations would worsen if they assisted
Mr. Snowden.

On Sunday, Representative Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan and chairman of
the House intelligence committee, suggested that any country ultimately
harboring Mr. Snowden should be made to pay a price. ''We shouldn't just allow
this to happen and shrug it off,'' he said on CNN. ''This is serious business.
Those Latin American companies enjoy clear trade benefits with the United
States. We ought to look at all of that to send a very clear message that we
won't put up with this kind of behavior.'' Nonetheless, he said he felt certain
that a South American country that has offered asylum would follow through and
provide travel papers. ''I absolutely do, and I'm sure they're working on
this,'' he said.

Mr. Pushkov's comments typically echo the Kremlin's line, and to that extent
they underscored a crucial point: Russia still has no intention of turning Mr.
Snowden over to the United States or impeding his travel to any country willing
to shelter him.

In fact, far more powerful Russian officials, including President Vladmir V.
Putin, have suggested that there is no set limit on the amount of time Mr.
Snowden can remain in his traveler's purgatory in the transit zone of the
airport, where technically, they say, he has not crossed onto Russian territory.
But Mr. Putin has also said that the sooner Mr. Snowden picks a destination and
leaves, the better.

Still, even as the asylum offers from Venezuela and Nicaragua suggested that Mr.
Snowden's sojourn in Russia might be nearing its end, getting to his final
destination will not be easy.

Traveling 10,000 kilometers, or more than 6,000 miles, can be a daunting
prospect under any circumstances. But Mr. Snowden and his supporters at
WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy group, are now contemplating flight complications of
a magnitude unfathomable to even the most experienced frequent fliers.

The easiest route to Latin America from Moscow would take Mr. Snowden first to
Havana, where he could connect to direct flights either to Caracas or Managua.
But if he purchases a ticket for a regularly scheduled flight on Aeroflot, the
Russian carrier, something that Mr. Putin has said Mr. Snowden is free to do at
any time, would the United States go so far as to force down a commercial
jetliner once it crosses into U.S. airspace, which is part of its normal flight
path? And even if the Americans are loath to force down a passenger jet, would
Cuba, given a mild thaw in relations with the United States, allow Mr. Snowden
to pass through Havana?

If Mr. Snowden and his supporters try to arrange for a private jet, could his
benefactors afford one big enough to make the nearly 16-hour flight without
refueling, to avoid stopping in a country that would be likely to seize him at
the request of the United States? And if a private or government plane is sent
to pick him up, would it face the same airspace restrictions that forced the
plane of President Evo Morales of Bolivia to land in Vienna on his way home from
a conference in Moscow last week?

Mr. Morales, still angered by the diversion of his aircraft, said Saturday that
Bolivia would also grant Mr. Snowden asylum ''if he asked for it.'' Mr. Morales,
whose openness to sheltering Mr. Snowden apparently led to the false conclusion
that he had smuggled Mr. Snowden onto his plane, said the asylum offer was now
intended as retaliation.

''As a fair protest'' against the United States and Europe, ''we are going to
give him asylum if he asks us for it, that American pursued by his countrymen,''
Mr. Morales said at a public appearance in a Bolivian village, according to
local news reports. ''We are not afraid.'' Mr. Morales did not say whether
Bolivia had received a request from Mr. Snowden, who has apparently applied for
shelter in more than two dozen countries. Most of those requests have been
rejected. Nicaragua's president said his country had received a request and
would grant it ''if circumstances permit it.''

State Department officials have been in touch with each of the Latin American
nations that have expressed a willingness to harbor Mr. Snowden, the senior
administration official said Saturday, and have urged them to expel him if he
arrives. But the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to talk about
diplomatic matters, conceded that the United States already had poor relations
with these countries, and while those ties would worsen should Mr. Snowden
receive protection, it remained unclear what the United States would do.

''There is not a country in the hemisphere whose government does not understand
our position at this point,'' the official said, adding that any aid for Mr.
Snowden ''would put relations in a very bad place for a long time to come.''The
official added, ''If someone thinks things would go away, it won't be the
case.''

The United States said that the diversion of Mr. Morales's plane was
''unfortunate.'' But there was a much stronger reaction in Russia, where Mr.
Putin often makes a point of demanding respect for state sovereignty. The
Russian Foreign Ministry condemned the European countries that barred Mr.
Morales from traveling through their airspace.

And Mr. Pushkov wrote on Twitter: ''The Snowden case argues that the U.S.
attempt to bring the world under the electronic and military-political control
is doomed. Action gives rise to reaction.''

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE:  July 10, 2013



CORRECTION:

A caption on Monday with a photograph of President Evo Morales of Bolivia
omitted credit for the photographer. The photo was taken by Danilo Balderrama of
Reuters.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              215 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                              July 8, 2013 Monday

Russia official: Venezuela last chance for Snowden

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 505 words


An influential Russian parliament member who often speaks for the Kremlin has
encouraged NSA leaker Edward Snowden to accept Venezuela"s offer of asylum.

Alexei Pushkov, who heads the international affairs committee in Russia"s
parliament, posted a message on Twitter saying: "Venezuela is waiting for an
answer from Snowden. This, perhaps, is his last chance to receive political
asylum."

Venezuelan Foreign Minister Elias Jaua said Saturday (local time) his country
hasn"t yet been in contact with Snowden, who Russian officials say has been
stuck in the transit area of Moscow"s Sheremetyevo Airport since arriving on a
flight from Hong Kong two weeks ago. He has been unable to travel further
because the US annulled his passport.

Jaua said he expects to consult with Russian officials on Monday about Snowden"s
situation.

Pushkov"s comments appeared to indicate that the Kremlin is now anxious to be
rid of the former National Security Agency systems analyst, whom the US wants
returned to face espionage charges.

There has been no response from the Kremlin or Russian Foreign Ministry to the
asylum offer made by Venezuela"s President Nicolas Maduro in the early hours of
Saturday, Moscow time.

For Snowden to leave for South America, he would need for Venezuela to issue him
travel documents and he would need to find a way to get there. The only direct
commercial flight from Moscow goes to Havana, Cuba, and Snowden had booked a
seat on this flight the day after arriving from Hong Kong, but failed to show
up.

The Moscow-Havana flight goes over Europe and the US, which could cause
complications. Some European countries refused to allow Bolivian President Evo
Morales to fly through their airspace on his way home from Moscow last week
because of suspicions that Snowden was onboard his plane.

Pushkov joked that if Snowden doesn"t find shelter in Venezuela, "he will have
to stay and marry Anna Chapman," the redheaded Russian spy who was among 10
sleeper agents deported from the US in 2010. The 31-year-old Chapman proposed to
Snowden, who just turned 30, on Twitter last week.

The presidents of Bolivia and Nicaragua also said over the weekend that Snowden
was welcome in their countries. Bolivia"s foreign minister, David Choquehuanca,
said Sunday on state television that his country hasn"t yet received a formal
petition for asylum from Snowden. Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega said his
country"s embassy in Moscow has received Snowden"s application and is studying
the request.

Snowden has applied for asylum in more than two dozen countries, including
Bolivia, Nicaragua and Venezuela, according to WikiLeaks, the secret-spilling
website that has been advising him.

US Sen. Robert Menendez, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
said he wasn"t surprised that those three Latin American nations were offering
asylum.

"They like sticking it to the United States," Menendez told NBC"s "Meet the
Press."

He also mentioned re-examining US trade policies and foreign aid to any country
that might take in Snowden.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              216 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                        July 8, 2013 Monday 9:56 PM GMT

New Edward Snowden interview excerpts released;
New excerpts of an interview with US leaker Edward Snowden filmed before he fled
Hong Kong for Russia have been released.

LENGTH: 266 words


Major US corporations allow the country's National Security Agency (NSA) "direct
access to the back ends of all of the systems that you use to communicate,"
according to former NSA systems analyst, Edward Snowden.

Snowden, who made the allegations in Hong Kong to the Guardian newspaper in June
before fleeing to Russia, alleged companies such as Google, Facebook, Apple and
Microsoft "get together" with the NSA to provide information.

"They give the NSA direct access, that they don't need to oversee, so they can't
be held liable for it," he claimed.

Since the first part of Snowden's video was released, the NSA has stated that it
only targets foreign traffic, and Snowden's latest disclosures claim "the NSA
doesn't limit itself to foreign intelligence, it collects all communications
that transit the United States."

Snowden accused NSA chief General Keith Alexander of lying to the US Congress by
saying the agency could not determine how many US communications are gathered,
something Snowden claimed that an NSA "global auditing system," Boundless
Informant, does.

Snowden also alleged "the NSA lied about the existence of this tool to congress
and to specific congressmen in response to previous inquiries about their
surveillance activities."

NSA officials had no immediate comment, but Mr Alexander has said such data can
only be analysed when linked to foreign targets.

Snowden, now a fugitive, is believed to be stranded in a Moscow airport, trying
to reach any country that has granted him asylum.

Courtesy: Guardian, Glenn Greenwald and Laura Poitra

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              217 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              July 8, 2013 Monday
                                 First EDITION

Snowden advised to take offer;
Russian official says asylum in Venezuela may be his 'last chance'

BYLINE: The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 415 words


An influential Russian parliament member who often speaks for the Kremlin
encouraged NSA leaker Edward Snowden on Sunday to accept Venezuela's offer of
asylum.

Alexei Pushkov, who heads the international affairs committee in Russia's
parliament, posted a message on Twitter saying: "Venezuela is waiting for an
answer from Snowden. This, perhaps, is his last chance to receive political
asylum."

Venezuelan Foreign Minister Elias Jaua said his country hasn't yet been in
contact with Snowden, who Russia says has been stuck in the transit area of
Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport since arriving on a flight from Hong Kong two
weeks ago. He has been unable to travel  because the U.S. annulled his passport.

Jaua said he expects to consult with Russian officials today about Snowden's
situation.

Pushkov's comments might indicate the Kremlin is eager to be rid of the former
National Security Agency analyst, whom the U.S. wants returned to face espionage
charges.

There has been no response from the Kremlin or Russian Foreign Ministry to the
asylum offer made by Venezuela's President Nicolás Maduro on Saturday.

For Snowden to leave for South America, he would need for Venezuela to issue him
travel documents and he would need to find a way to get there. The only direct
commercial flight from Moscow stops in Havana. The Moscow-Havana flight goes
over Europe and the USA, which could cause complications. Some European
countries refused to allow Bolivian President Evo Morales to fly through their
airspace on his way home from Moscow last week because of suspicions that
Snowden was on his plane.

Pushkov joked that if Snowden doesn't find shelter in Venezuela, "he will have
to stay and marry Anna Chapman," a Russian spy who was among 10 sleeper agents
deported from the U.S. in 2010. Chapman, 31, proposed to Snowden, who just
turned 30, on Twitter last week.

The presidents of Bolivia and Nicaragua also said over the weekend that Snowden
is welcome in their countries. Bolivia's foreign minister, David Choquehuanca,
said Sunday that his country hasn't yet received a formal petition. Nicaraguan
President Daniel Ortega said his country received Snowden's application and is
studying the request. Snowden has applied for asylum in more than two dozen
countries.

Sen. Robert Menendez, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said
he wasn't surprised those three Latin American nations were offering asylum.
"They like sticking it to the United States," he told NBC's Meet the Press.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              218 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russian Official Says Venezuela Is the 'Best Solution' for Snowden

BYLINE: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD; David M. Herszenhorn
reported from Moscow, and Randal C. Archibold from Mexico City.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1120 words


MOSCOW -- A senior member of the Russian Parliament said Saturday that political
asylum in Venezuela would be ''the best solution'' for Edward J. Snowden, the
former intelligence contractor who is on the run from the American authorities.

The comments by the Russian lawmaker, Aleksei Pushkov, the chairman of the
international affairs committee of the State Duma, the lower house of
Parliament, came just a few hours after Venezuela and Nicaragua extended the
first firm offers of asylum to Mr. Snowden, who has been holed up at
Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow for nearly two weeks, and they seemed to reflect
the Kremlin's increasing desire to be rid of him.

''Sanctuary for Snowden in Venezuela would be the best solution,'' Mr. Pushkov
posted on Twitter. ''The country has a sharp conflict with the United States. It
will not be worse. And he can't live in Sheremetyevo.''

In fact, the United States and Venezuela recently began talks toward
reconciliation, progress that a senior Obama administration official said
Saturday would end if Venezuela sheltered Mr. Snowden, as President Nicolás
Maduro said he would, or aided his journey. The official cautioned other nations
in Latin America, hinting that relations would worsen if they assisted Mr.
Snowden.

Mr. Pushkov's comments typically echo the Kremlin's line and, to that extent,
they underscore a crucial point: Russia still has no intention of turning Mr.
Snowden over to the United States or impeding his travel to any country willing
to shelter him.

In fact, far more powerful Russian officials, including President Vladimir V.
Putin, have suggested that there is no set limit on the amount of time Mr.
Snowden can remain in his traveler's purgatory in the transit zone of the
airport, where technically, they say, he has not crossed onto Russia territory.
But Mr. Putin has also said that the sooner Mr. Snowden picks a destination and
leaves, the better.

Still, even as the asylum offers from Venezuela and Nicaragua suggested that Mr.
Snowden's sojourn in Russia might be nearing its end, getting to his final
destination will not be easy.

Mr. Snowden and his supporters at WikiLeaks, the antisecrecy group, are now
contemplating complications for a more than 6,000 mile flight that are of a
magnitude unfathomable to even the most experienced frequent fliers.

The easiest route to Latin America from Moscow would take Mr. Snowden first to
Havana, where he could then connect to direct flights either to Caracas,
Venezuela, or Managua, Nicaragua. But if he purchases a ticket for a regularly
scheduled flight on Aeroflot, the Russian carrier, which Mr. Putin has said Mr.
Snowden is free to do at any time, would the United States go so far as to force
down a commercial jetliner once it crosses into American airspace, which is part
of its normal flight path? And even if the Americans are loath to force down a
passenger jet, would Cuba, given a mild thaw in relations with the United
States, allow Mr. Snowden to pass through Havana?

If Mr. Snowden and his supporters try to arrange for a private jet, could his
benefactors afford one big enough to make the nearly 16-hour flight without
refueling, to avoid stopping in a country that would be likely to seize him at
the request of the United States? And if a private or government plane is sent
to pick him up, would it face the same airspace restrictions that forced the
plane of President Evo Morales of Bolivia to land in Vienna on his way home from
a conference in Moscow last week?

Mr. Morales, still fuming over the diversion of his aircraft, said Saturday that
Bolivia would also grant Mr. Snowden asylum ''if he asked for it.'' Mr. Morales,
whose openness to sheltering Mr. Snowden apparently led to the false conclusion
that he had smuggled Mr. Snowden onto his airplane, said the decision on asylum
was now intended as retaliation.

''As a fair protest'' against the United States and Europe, ''we are going to
give him asylum if he asks us for it, that American pursued by his countrymen,''
Mr. Morales said at a public appearance in a Bolivian village, according to
local news reports. ''We are not afraid.''

Mr. Morales did not say if Bolivia had received a request from Mr. Snowden, who
has apparently applied for shelter in more than two dozen countries. Most of
those requests have been rejected. Nicaragua's president said his country had
received a request and would grant it ''if circumstances permit it.''

State Department officials have been in touch with each of the Latin American
nations that have expressed a willingness to harbor Mr. Snowden, the senior
administration official said Saturday, and have urged them to expel him if he
arrives. But the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to talk about
diplomatic matters, conceded that the United States already had poor relations
with these countries, and while those ties would worsen should Mr. Snowden
receive protection, it remained unclear what the United States would do.

''There is not a country in the hemisphere whose government does not understand
our position at this point,'' the official said, adding that any aid for Mr.
Snowden ''would put relations in a very bad place for a long time to come.'' The
official added, ''If someone thinks things would go away, it won't be the
case.''

The United States said that the diversion of Mr. Morales's plane was
''unfortunate.'' But there was a much stronger reaction in Russia, where Mr.
Putin often makes a point of demanding respect for state sovereignty. The
Russian Foreign Ministry condemned the European countries that barred Mr.
Morales from traveling through their airspace.

Aeroflot's regular flight to Havana departed Saturday on schedule at 2:05 p.m.,
and Mr. Snowden was not on board. And, as has been the case since he arrived in
Moscow from Hong Kong 13 days ago, there was not a trace of him at the airport.
Russian officials have declined to say whether he is holed up in one of the
hotels that serve transit passengers or has been staying in some hidden section
of the airport.

Cuba has not said how it might react if Mr. Snowden arrives in Havana for a
connecting flight to Caracas or Managua. It could follow Russia's lead and treat
him as a transit passenger who has technically not crossed onto Cuban territory.
But American officials have made clear that they view that as a mere
technicality and have urged any government with access to seize him and send him
back to the United States.

Mr. Pushkov suggested that the United States was paying a price for its
arrogance. ''The Snowden case argues that the U.S. attempt to bring the world
under the electronic and military-political control is doomed,'' he wrote on
Twitter. ''Action gives rise to reaction.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/07/world/europe/russian-official-says-venezuela-i
s-the-best-solution-for-snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, left, and President Evo
Morales of Bolivia, center, were among those warned by the United States not to
aid the flight of Edward J. Snowden, right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVAN
SEKRETAREV/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES
HELMUT FOHRINGER/E.P.A.
 GUARDIAN, VIA REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday

Snowden"s fate unclear despite asylum offers

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 670 words


Edward Snowden has found supporters in Latin America, including three countries
who have offered him asylum. But many obstacles stand in the way of the fugitive
NSA leaker from leaving a Russian airport - chief among them the power and
influence of the United States.

Because Snowden"s U.S. passport has been revoked, the logistics of him departing
are complicated. Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia have made asylum offers over
the past two days, but the three countries haven"t indicated they would help
Snowden by issuing a travel document, which he would need to leave Russia.

The former NSA systems analyst, who is charged with violating U.S. espionage
laws, is believed to be stuck in the transit area of Moscow"s main international
airport after arriving June 23 from Hong Kong.

Russia doesn"t appear willing to help him leave the airport, with Kremlin
spokesman Alexei Pavlov saying Saturday the issue of Snowden"s travel documents
is "not our business." On Monday, President Vladimir Putin said Snowden would be
offered asylum in Russia if he stopped leaking U.S. secrets. Snowden then
withdrew his Russian asylum bid, a Russian official said.

While President Barack Obama has publicly displayed a relaxed attitude toward
Snowden"s movements, saying last month that he wouldn"t be "scrambling jets" to
capture him, other senior U.S. officials have used unusually harsh language that
they want him back.

White House spokesman Jay Carney said China had "unquestionably" damaged its
relationship with Washington for not returning Snowden, who recently turned 30,
from semi-autonomous Hong Kong while he was still there.

"The Chinese have emphasized the importance of building mutual trust," Carney
said last month. "We think that they have dealt that effort a serious setback.
If we cannot count on them to honor their legal extradition obligations, then
there is a problem."

China may be reluctant to further complicate its relationship with the U.S. by
allowing Snowden back in Hong Kong, even if only as a transfer point to Latin
America.

Snowden has asked for asylum in more than 20 countries and many have turned him
down. WikiLeaks, which has been helping Snowden, said Friday he had submitted
asylum applications to six new countries, which the secret-spilling website
declined to identify "due to attempted U.S. interference."

The asylum offers from Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia came after leftist South
American leaders gathered to denounce the rerouting of Bolivian President Evo
Morales" plane over Europe amid reports that the fugitive American was aboard.

Spain says it had been warned along with other European countries that Snowden
was aboard the Bolivian presidential plane, an acknowledgement the manhunt for
the fugitive leaker had something to do with the plane"s unexpected diversion to
Austria. It is unclear whether Washington warned Madrid about the Bolivian
president"s plane.

On Saturday, Morales offered asylum to Snowden, but didn"t say if Bolivia had
received a request from him.

"I want to tell those Europeans and North Americans that as a just protest we
now will give asylum to that North American who is persecuted by his
compatriots," Morales said during an appearance in the indigenous town of
Chipaya.

U.S. officials have declined to comment on the grounding of Morales" plane. They
said they won"t give details about their conversations with European countries,
except to say that they have stated Washington"s general position that it wants
Snowden back.

Snowden, who on Saturday afternoon wasn"t on an Interpol list of people for whom
international arrest warrants have been issued, had booked a seat on a
Havana-bound flight on June 24, but never made it.

Direct Havana flights, operated by Aeroflot from Moscow"s main airport five
times a week, are the easiest option of reaching Latin America from Moscow. But
the Moscow-Havana"s travel path passes over mainland U.S., raising the chances
of it being grounded. There are other routes, but there is no assurance he"d
have free passage.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              220 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             The Observer (England)

                                  July 7, 2013

US attempts to block Snowden are 'bolstering case' for asylum: Legal experts say
Washington's actions hand whistleblower strong grounds to seek haven

BYLINE: Jamie Doward

SECTION: OBSERVER HOME NEWS PAGES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 612 words


Attempts by the US to close down intelligence whistleblower Edward Snowden's
asylum options are strengthening his case to seek a safe harbour outside of
Russia, legal experts claim.

Snowden, who is believed to be in the transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport, has received provisional offers of asylum from Nicaragua and Venezuela,
and last night Bolivia also offered him sanctuary. He has applied to at least
six other countries, says the Wikileaks organisation providing legal support.

Michael Bochenek, director of law and policy at Amnesty International, said the
American government's actions were bolstering Snowden's case. He said claims
that the US had sought to reroute the plane of Bolivia's president, Evo Morales,
amid reports that the fugitive former analyst for the National Security Agency
was on board, and suggestions that vice-president Joe Biden had phoned the
Ecuadorean leader, Rafael Correa, to block asylum for Snowden, carried serious
implications.

"Interfering with the right to seek asylum is a serious problem in international
law," Bochenek said. "It is further evidence that he [Snowden] has a
well-founded fear of persecution. This will be relevant to any state when
considering an application. International law says that somebody who fears
persecution should not be returned to that country."

Venezuela's extradition treaties with the US contain clauses that allow it to
reject requests if it believes they are politically motivated. The country's
president, Nicolas Maduro, has praised Snowden for being a "young man who told
the truth" and has criticised European countries' alleged role in the rerouting
of Morales's plane last week .

"The European people have seen the cowardice and the weakness of their
governments, which now look like colonies of the US," he said on Friday.

Spain said it had been warned that Snowden was on the Bolivian presidential
plane, the first acknowledgement that the manhunt was linked to the plane's
diversion to Austria. Foreign minister Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo said: "They
told us that the information was clear, that he was inside." He did not say who
"they" were.

Speaking from Buenos Aires, Bochenek said the US actions were transforming the
Snowden affair into a global saga. "In PR terms, opinion here and elsewhere in
Latin America has shifted precisely because of the appearance of interference
with other governments' decision-making processes," he said.

Bochenek said there was no reason Snowden could not be granted asylum without
setting foot in the country that had granted him refuge. "It's true that a lot
of states have that as a rule in their own domestic requirements, but it is not
required by international law," he said.

Neither did placing Snowden on an Interpol "red flag" list mean that states had
to hand him over to the US. The procedure is an advisory measure that can be
ignored, legal experts said.

A decision to give Snowden refuge has political consequences for Maduro, and
provides his critics with ammunition.

Venezuela's opposition leader, Henrique Capriles, has accused Maduro of using
Snowden to distract voters from economic woes at home.

Nicaragua's president, Daniel Ortega, said he was willing to offer asylum, "if
circumstances allow it". Venezuela, though, appears a more likely host.

"Asylum for Snowden in Venezuela would be the best solution," Alexei Pushkov,
chairman of the international affairs committee of Russia's lower house of
parliament, said on Twitter. "That country is in a sharp conflict with the US."

Captions:

The US intelligence whistleblower Edward Snowden has been offered support by
Venezuela's Nicolas Maduro and Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua. Reuters


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              222 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 Sunday Herald

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday
                                   1 Edition

Snowden is offered asylum - but getting to it could be tricky

BYLINE: 'He is a young man who has told the truth about the US spying on the
whole world,' says Venezuelan president By Daniel Wallis in Caracas

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 550 words


Venezuela's president, Nicolas Maduro, has offered asylum to former US
intelligence contractor Edward Snowden in defiance of Washington, which is
demanding his arrest for divulging details of secret US spy programmes.

Snowden, 30, is believed to be holed up in the transit area of Moscow's
Sheremetyevo international airport and has been trying to find a country that
would take him since he landed there from Hong Kong on June 23.

"In the name of America's dignity ... I have decided to offer humanitarian
asylum to Edward Snowden," Maduro said, speaking at a military parade marking
Venezuela's independence day. "He is a young man who has told the truth, in the
spirit of rebellion, about the US spying on the whole world."

Russia has kept the former National Security Agency contractor at arm's length,
saying the transit area where passengers stay between flights is neutral
territory and he will be on Russian soil only if he goes through passport
control.

It was not immediately clear how Snowden would react to Maduro's offer, nor how
he would reach Venezuela if he accepted it. There are no direct commercial
flights between Moscow and Caracas. And, given the dramatic grounding in Vienna
of the Bolivian president's plane last week over suspicions that Snowden was on
board, using European airspace could prove problematic.

Russia has shown signs of growing impatience over Snowden's stay in Moscow. The
country's deputy foreign minister said on Thursday that Snowden had not sought
asylum in Russia and needed to choose a place to go. Moscow has made clear that
the longer he stays there, the greater the risk of the diplomatic standoff over
his fate causing lasting damage to Russia's relations with Washington.

Both Russia's foreign ministry and president Vladimir Putin's spokesman declined
to comment on Venezuela's offer.

But senior pro-Kremlin lawmaker Alexei Pushkov, head of the international
affairs committee of Russia's lower house of parliament, said asylum in
Venezuela would be Snowden's best option.

The White House declined to comment on the matter.

Raising the possibility of at least one other option, Nicaragua said it had
received an asylum request from Snowden and could agree to it "if circumstances
permit".

WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy organisation, said on Twitter on Friday that Snowden
had asked six more nations for asylum, bringing to about 20 the number of
countries he has appealed to for protection from US espionage charges.

WikiLeaks said it would not reveal which six new countries Snowden had applied
to for asylum, due to "attempted US interference".

However, Maduro said Venezuela was ready to offer him sanctuary. He added that
the details Snowden had revealed of US spy programmes had exposed the nefarious
schemes of the US "empire".

"Who is the guilty one? A young man ... who denounces war plans, or the US
government which launches bombs and arms the terrorist Syrian opposition against
the people and legitimate president Bashar al-Assad?" he asked, to applause and
cheers from ranks of military officers at the parade.

Since narrowly winning a presidential election in April that followed the death
of his mentor, Hugo Chavez, from cancer, Maduro has often lambasted the US, even
accusing the Pentagon and former US officials of plotting to kill him.

[#x25a0]US/VEnezuela

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Venezuela's Nicolas Maduro, right, has offered Edward Snowden, top,
asylum. He is currently in a Moscow airport, centre. Nicaragua, under Daniel
Ortega, above, has also been approached by Snowden Main Photograph: AP/PA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SH


                      Copyright 2013 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              223 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                           The Sunday Times (London)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Next stop Venezuela for secrets leaker Snowden

BYLINE: Toby Harnden

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 208 words


THE United States has formally requested that Venezuela arrest and extradite
Edward Snowden, the fugitive American intelligence contractor, if he flees
Russia and arrives in the South American country.

The request was filed in a pre-emptive move after Nicolas Maduro, Venezuela's
president, announced he had offered asylum to Snowden, 30, who has had his US
passport withdrawn after he leaked secret information.

Maduro's offer came amid growing indications that Russia was becoming
exasperated by Snowden's 13-day presence in the transit zone of Moscow's
Sheremetyevo international airport and would like him to leave.

Sergei Ryabkov, Russia's deputy foreign minister, made clear yesterday that
Snowden is an unwanted guest, stating that "he needs to choose a place to go".

Nicaragua has also offered Snowden asylum. Last night Evo Morales, the Bolivian
president, followed suit.

Morales said he was making the offer as a protest against America and the
European nations he had accused of temporarily blocking his flight home from a
Moscow summit because they suspected he had Snowden on board. Snowden's father,
Lon Snowden, who lives in Upper Macungie, Pennsylvania, was said by his lawyer,
Bruce Fein, to be "deeply distressed" by his son's predicament.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                    Copyright 2013 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              224 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                         Sunday Herald Sun (Australia)

                              July 7, 2013 Sunday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

THE GREAT ESCAPE ... but how will Edward Snowden make it from Russia to Latin
America?

BYLINE: David Hurley

SECTION: AGENDA6; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1258  words


THE past few weeks of Edward Joseph Snowden's life read like the script of a
Hollywood thriller.

The 30-year-old American shot to worldwide prominence last month when he lifted
the lid on top-secret US surveillance schemes.

Since then the fugitive intelligence analyst has been evading US authorities
around the globe.

The US wants to prosecute him for the leaking of thousands of classified
intelligence documents.

As his revelations continue to send shockwaves around the world, Snowden's
whistleblowing journey has taken him from Hawaii, to Hong Kong and on to Russia
-- where he has been holed up for 12 days in Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport.

With Russia refusing to help him, the American frantically asked countries to
take him in as he fights extradition to his homeland.

WikiLeaks, which has been assisting him, said yesterday he had begged more
nations to take him.

``Edward Snowden has applied to another six countries for asylum,'' the website
tweeted. ``They will not be named at this time due to attempted US
interference.''

This now takes the total of countries approached to 27.

And his prayers finally appeared to be answered yesterday when Venezuela and
Nicaragua responded.

President Nicolas Maduro said in a speech on Venezuela's Independence Day: ``I
have decided to offer humanitarian asylum to the young US citizen Edward Snowden
so he can come to the fatherland of Bolivar and Chavez to live away from the
imperial North American persecution.''

While Nicaragua's president Daniel Ortega, a long-time opponent of the US, said:
``If circumstances permit it, we would receive Snowden with pleasure and give
him asylum here.''

Both offers are sure to inflame the simmering tensions between some of the
leftist governments of Latin America and the US.

Whichever country Snowden chooses, his route to Latin America will be fraught
with danger and difficulty.

He need only look at the diplomatic row which broke out this week involving
Bolivia and the US.

Several European countries refused to allow a jet carrying the Bolivian
President Evo Morales to enter their airspace because the US believed Snowden
was on board.

The incident sparked suggestions the US is quietly orchestrating an
international manhunt for Snowden.

Presidents from Argentina, Ecuador, Uruguay and Venezuela lined up to demand
Spain, France, Portugal and Italy apologise and explain their reasons for
denying the Bolivian presidential jet permission to fly through their airspace
on July 2.

Most commercial flights between Latin America and Moscow stop off in Spanish,
French and Italian cities.

It is up for debate whether those countries would risk infuriating the US and
allow Snowden to use their airports for his onward journey to safety.

Snowden could also use a private plane to get to his safe haven. But it is
unclear if WikiLeaks would stump up the required cash for such a costly venture.

Snowden fled Hawaii on May 20 just before he passed details about the snooping
schemes to the The Guardian newspaper in Britain, which earned the praise of
WikiLeaks founder and accused hacker Julian Assange.

The son of a US Coast Guard officer and court clerk, Snowden grew up in the port
city of Wilmington in North Carolina.

By his late teens the family had moved to Maryland, where Snowden began studying
computing at college.

He enlisted in the US Army in 2004 but dropped out due to injury.

From there he went on to join the National Security Agency (NSA), where he
worked as a security guard.

The self-proclaimed computer wizard then moved on to the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) to work in IT security.

Snowden returned to the NSA to work at a facility on a US military base in Japan
before moving to Hawaii.

While in Hawaii, Snowden began a relationship with 28-year-old pole dancer
Lindsay Mills.

In an online blog Ms Mills described her boyfriend as ``E'' and her ``man of
mystery''.

After his departure she wrote: ``My world has opened and closed all at once.
Leaving me lost at sea without a compass''.

``As I type this on my tear-streaked keyboard I'm reflecting on all the faces
that have graced my path.

``The ones I laughed with. The ones I've held.

``The one I've grown to love the most. And the ones I never got to bid adieu.''

When Snowden left Hawaii for Hong Kong he told his girlfriend he had to go away
for a while, but was deliberately vague about his trip. In her blog, written
hours after Snowden sensationally revealed he was the source of the leaks, she
wrote: ``Sometimes life doesn't afford proper goodbyes''.

Her blog, called ``Adventures of a world-travelling, pole-dancing superhero'',
offers intriguing insights into the couple's life in Hawaii. Snowden's job at
the NSA saw him earn a good salary of $133,000.

After telling the world he was the source of the succession of leaks in The
Guardian, Snowden checked out of his Hong Kong hotel at the end of June before
winding up in Moscow.

Friends of Ms Mills say she has been left heartbroken and feels betrayed by
Snowden.

One friend said: ``No one likes to have secrets kept from them. I don't think
she would be the person that would stay with someone like that. That must
hurt.''

The friend, one of the last people to see Ms Mills before Snowden outed himself
as the whistleblower, also said there was nothing to indicate she knew anything
about her boyfriend stealing secret data.

The 23-year-old didn't recall anything suspicious about Ms Mills's behaviour in
the weeks leading up to Snowden's flight from Hawaii.

She said: ``I never suspected anything suspicious.

``Whenever we talked about her life, she just seemed normal to me.

``I don't think she would have been keeping that kind of secret.''

Snowden's options were dwindling by the hour after he arrived in Moscow from
Hong Kong with no valid travel documents after the US revoked his passport.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said he was unwilling to send Snowden to the
US, with which Russia has no extradition treaty.

But he was also reluctant to damage ties over a man for whom Putin, a former KGB
spy, has little sympathy.

Assange, who has found sanctuary in the Ecuadorean embassy in London, has
attacked President Barack Obama over the Snowden situation. His comments came
after the row over the Bolivian presidential jet.

After Mr Obama said he was not going to scramble jets for ``some 29-year-old
hacker'', Assange accused the US President of lying, and said he ``may have
alienated an entire continent as a result of thin-skinned vindictiveness''.

As Hollywood already starts to debate who should play the whistleblower in a
movie adaptation of the saga, Snowden is faced with the prospect of life in
prison or the death penalty should he be found guilty of espionage -- if, that
is, he is ever returned to his native US soil.

After spending some long and lonely nights hiding away in a Russian airport,
Snowden can now look forward to a life in Latin America.

A great escape, for now. But the whistleblower knows the US authorities will
never stop pursuing him.

Four laptops revealed America's biggest secrets, Page 34

EDWARD SNOWDEN'S NO GO LIST

Austria No

Bolivia Possible

Brazil No

China Deny having received Snowden's asylum request

Cuba No response

Ecuador No

Finland No

France Have denied receiving request

Germany Unlikely

Iceland No response

India No

Italy No

Ireland No

Holland No

Norway Unlikely

Poland No

Russia No. Snowden withdrew his request after Vladimir Putin said he would only
be welcome in the country if he stopped "his work aimed at bringing harm" to the
US

Spain No

Switzerland No

It is believed Snowden requested asylum from another six nations

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SHS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              227 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

Snowden gets 2 offers of asylum;
Venezuela and Nicaragua say they'd take him in, but it's unclear how or when.

BYLINE: Chris Kraul, Tracy Wilkinson, Mery Mogollon

SECTION: LATEXTRA; Foreign Desk; Part AA; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 507 words

DATELINE:  CARACAS, VENEZUELA


Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro offered NSA leaker Edward Snowden political
asylum Friday, possibly the firmest offer of refuge the U.S. fugitive has
received since exposing a massive program of surveillance of phone calls and
emails in the United States and abroad.

Also Friday, Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega said his government had received
an asylum request from Snowden and would be willing to grant it under the right
circumstances.

Snowden, who is believed to be stranded in the transit area of a Moscow airport,
has applied for refuge to about 30 countries. Many have refused his request.

Maduro made the offer during a military parade in Caracas commemorating the
202nd anniversary of Venezuela's declaration of independence. He had previously
said he would consider such an offer, as had Ecuador's President Rafael Correa.

Correa, however, appeared to back away from his offer after receiving a phone
call from Vice President Joe Biden.

Although Maduro's statement Friday seemed to go a step further in making a firm
offer, the Venezuelan leader was in Moscow this week and did not take the
opportunity to bring Snowden back with him. And Maduro made no mention of
facilitating Snowden's trip to Venezuela with either an aircraft or travel
documents.

He did not say specifically that Snowden had formally applied for asylum.

Although the offer may hearten Snowden, who has been in limbo since fleeing Hong
Kong on June 23 amid U.S. efforts to extradite him, it was still unclear Friday
night how Maduro's offer would work.

The U.S. has revoked Snowden's passport, so he needs valid travel documents to
buy a plane ticket to leave Russia.

In Nicaragua, meanwhile, Ortega said the right to asylum had to be respected.

"It is clear that, if the circumstances permit it, we will happily receive
Snowden," Ortega said in a speech in Managua, "and we will give him asylum here
in Nicaragua."

Ortega, once a leftist revolutionary leader who was a constant thorn in
Washington's side, did not specify what circumstances he meant. Snowden's
request, he said, came through the Nicaraguan Embassy in Moscow.

It was difficult to gauge the sincerity of Ortega's offer, as he committed to
virtually nothing.

He may have been playing to his constituency -- the speech was made before
hundreds of supporters -- by offering a message in solidarity with other
regional heads of state.

On Thursday, many of South America's leftist leaders rallied to support Bolivian
President Evo Morales, whose plane was rerouted over Europe on Tuesday amid
suspicion that Snowden was on board.

Morales has accused Washington of pressuring European countries to refuse to
allow his plane to enter their airspace, forcing it to land in Vienna, according
to the Associated Press.

Morales had been returning from a summit in Russia during which he had suggested
he would be willing to consider an asylum request from Snowden.

--

Special correspondents Mogollon and Kraul reported from Caracas and Bogota,
Colombia, respectively. Times staff writer Wilkinson reported from Mexico City.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              228 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Venezuela Offers Asylum to N.S.A. Leaker

BYLINE: By WILLIAM NEUMAN and DAVID M. HERSZENHORN; María Eugenia Díaz
contributed reporting from Caracas, Venezuela.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 539 words


President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela said Friday that he would offer asylum to
the fugitive intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden, who has been stranded in
a Moscow airport searching for a safe haven.

''I have decided to offer humanitarian asylum to the young American Edward
Snowden,'' Mr. Maduro said during a televised appearance at a military parade
marking Venezuela's independence day.

Mr. Maduro said he had decided to act ''to protect this young man from the
persecution unleashed by the world's most powerful empire.''

It was not immediately clear, however, how Mr. Snowden could reach Venezuela or
if Mr. Maduro was willing to help transport him.

Also on Friday, Daniel Ortega, the president of Nicaragua, said he was open to
taking in Mr. Snowden. ''It is clear that if the circumstances permit we will
take in Mr. Snowden with pleasure and give him asylum in Nicaragua,'' Mr. Ortega
said in Managua.

Mr. Snowden has sought asylum from more than two dozen nations. Most countries
have declined.

The offers from Venezuela and Nicaragua appeared to be linked to outrage in
Latin America over the treatment last week of President Evo Morales of Bolivia,
whose plane was denied permission to fly over several European countries because
of what Bolivian officials said were unfounded suspicions that Mr. Snowden was
aboard. Mr. Morales was on his way home from a meeting in Moscow.

Mr. Maduro had previously voiced sympathy for Mr. Snowden. He frequently bashes
the United States, depicting it as an imperialist bully in Latin America. But at
the same time he has shown a desire to improve relations with the United States,
directing his foreign minister to start talks with Washington aimed at smoothing
the rocky relationship with the top buyer of his country's all-important oil
exports.

Earlier on Friday, WikiLeaks said in a post on Twitter that Mr. Snowden, who is
wanted by the United States on charges of revealing classified government
information, ''has applied to another six countries for asylum,'' following up
on similar applications to about 20 nations last week.

Supporters of Mr. Snowden clearly blame the refusals on pressure from the United
States, and, as a result, WikiLeaks said it would not reveal the latest
countries in which he is seeking shelter. ''They will not be named at this time
due to attempted US interference,'' the group wrote on Twitter.

In Russia, officials have expressed impatience over Mr. Snowden's continuing
sojourn in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo airport. On Thursday, a deputy
foreign minister, Sergey A. Ryabkov, told reporters that Mr. Snowden should pick
a destination and leave as soon as possible.

Russia was apparently among the original countries to which Mr. Snowden
submitted an asylum request, but a spokesman for President Vladimir V. Putin,
Dmitri S. Peskov, has said since that the request was withdrawn.

On Thursday, Mr. Putin sent a telegram to President Obama noting the Fourth of
July holiday and restating his commitment to holding a summit meeting in Moscow
in September, ahead of the G20 conference, which will be in St. Petersburg.
American officials have signaled that Mr. Obama is unlikely to visit Moscow if
Mr. Snowden is still holed up at Sheremetyevo airport.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/06/world/snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Cold War nostalgia in hacker's flight

BYLINE: Paul McGeough

SECTION: NEWS REVIEW; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1556 words


Snowden's adventure offers everyone a chance to grandstand, says Paul McGeough.

Now it's getting really serious. The American ambassador to France can't even
hold a July 4 garden party without an upstart French minister giving him a
dressing down before hundreds of invited guests over the Edward Snowden
revelations on the extent to which Washington has the world wired.

When ambassador Charles Rivkin booked French Interior Minister Manuel Valls as
guest of honour, he was not to know that by the time his American Independence
Day fete came around there would be global tut-tutting over the spectacular
disclosures by the fugitive former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden,
hunkered in a Moscow transit lounge.

But Valls also serves as France's top security official. So as guests nursed
their champagne flutes, he gave it to the American Rivkin between the eyes,
telling him: "In the name of our friendship, we owe each other honesty. We must
say things clearly, directly, frankly."

This is classic "tut-tutting", a diplomatic art form that requires important
people to speak in high dudgeon at the height of national or global dramas in
the knowledge that they will not do much else - think now of much of the
European response to Snowden's leaking of Washington's spy secrets.

Then there is the inverted tut-tut, which requires the speaker to take a
position diametrically opposed to what he practices - think of the Chinese and
Russian leaders' defence of rights and liberties vis-a-vis Snowden.

And there is the teasing tut-tut, hinting you might do something when you know
you will not - think the Bolivian, Ecuadorian and Venezuelan leaders with their
praise for Snowden and their tongue-in-cheek suggestions that they might give
Snowden refuge.

Perhaps most dangerous of all is the reverse-tut-tut - seeming indifference to
mask fury and a determination to nail the cause of the initial tut-tutting,
which in this case is Washington's efforts to snatch Snowden and have him taken
to the US to face espionage charges.

Touring Africa early in the week, Barack Obama was quite good and highly
quotable at the reverse-TT - "I'm not going to be scrambling jets for a
29-year-old hacker".

But seemingly, Washington already had a target in its sights - Bolivian leader
Evo Morales.

Attending a conference in Moscow, Morales delivered a teasing-TT - he answered
"yes, why not?" when asked if Bolivia might shelter Snowden. That was apparently
enough for Washington to conclude that Snowden was on Morales' presidential jet
when he left Moscow for La Paz on Tuesday.

As those on board told the story, permission to transit French airspace was
withdrawn minutes before they were due to enter that sector; and previous
permission to overfly Portugal, Spain and Italy were withdrawn.

Morales was obliged to backtrack to Vienna, where his aircraft was searched by
Austrian authorities looking for Snowden. Even the Spanish ambassador to Austria
reportedly turned up on the tarmac, trying to board Morales' jet for a
sticky-beak.

At a midnight press conference in La Paz, Bolivia's vice-president Alvaro Garcia
Linera claimed that the highly unusual rerouting of Morales' aircraft amounted
to "kidnapping by imperialism".

"The want to frighten and intimidate me, but they won't scare me," Morales said,
leaving after a 14-hour layover - unprecedented treatment for a travelling
national leader, said aviation insiders. "We're not in colonial or imperial
times."

In Washington, State Department spokeswoman Jennifer Psaki responded thus to
Bolivian charges that the US had instigated the drama: "We have been in contact
with a range of countries across the world who had any chance of having Mr
Snowden land or even transit through their countries ... The message has been
communicated both publicly and privately - he should be returned to the US."

The treatment of Morales provoked outrage in South America, a lot of tut-tutting
to the extent that none of the leaders who might have been expected to extend a
hand to Snowden did so - Bolivia, Ecuador, Venezuela and Cuba in particular.

Reports from the region offer possible reasons - 45 per cent of Ecuador's
exports are sold to the US, and Venezuela and Cuba are deeply into diplomatic
efforts to improve historically scratchy relationships with Washington.

Similarly, none of the European victims of the American espionage web revealed
by Snowden has put up a hand to offer Snowden asylum - call that a masochistic
TT. But Europe and the US also are scheduled to begin detailed negotiations in
the coming days on a trans-Atlantic trade deal, potentially worth hundreds of
billions of dollars.

In an intriguing sideshow, the role of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who for
more than a year has been operating from the Ecuadorian embassy in London to
avoid extradition to Sweden and, possibly, from there to the US, is a point of
growing irritation for some.

Snowden's father and officials of the Quito government have been openly critical
of Assange's larger-than-life participation in the saga, prompting an email by a
senior Ecuadorian official, leaked to the media: "From the outside, [Assange]
appears to be running the show"; and an email from Assange, also leaked,
apologising to the Ecuadorian foreign minister for "unwittingly causing Ecuador
discomfort in the Snowden matter".

This week's collision of tut-tuts coincides with signs that having had its fun
with Snowden, Moscow is becoming impatient.

Early in the week President Vladimir Putin said that Snowden could have asylum,
but only if he agreed to stop causing difficulties for Washington; and on
Thursday Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov said that after squatting at
Sheremetyevo International Airport for 11 days Snowden should find refuge
elsewhere. "He needs to choose a place to go," Ryabkov said.

Snowden neatly managed his exit from Hong Kong, with local authorities
apparently stalling on an extradition request from Washington while Snowden
cleared out of the former British colony. But he'll be unnerved if ordered by
Moscow to hoof it after this week's dramatic display of a willingness by
countries in the region to co-operate with Washington's efforts to interdict
him.

A saving grace, from his perspective, is that Putin has insisted several times
that he would not hand Snowden back to the Americans.

It being the week of July 4 and with the overt patriotism of Independence Day in
the US, it was deemed un-American for anyone to ask how the US might respond
should a Russian or Chinese intelligence contractor wash up in Washington with a
swag of their government's secrets.

Would Obama comply with requests by Moscow or Beijing that they be returned to
face the music at home - particularly given the absence of extradition treaties?

Hardly.

At the same time, Moscow and Beijing are not exactly crusaders for press or
internet freedom, and neither could be relied on to go gently with their own
Edward Snowden or Bradley Manning.

So the use of the singular was telling in a headline in the official party organ
in China, the People's Daily: "Whistleblower welcome in China."

Combined, there is something of the theatre of the absurd in all the tut-tutting
over Snowden.

It's all very two-dimensional, because the likes of Russia and Europe have much
bigger deals in play with the US than the fate of one guy who decided to bomb
himself out of the water.

More troubling for some observers than the breadth of US surveillance at home
and abroad is the blanket of secrecy under which it operates - including secret,
classified court rulings.

How can there be an open debate?

Americans, for the most, follow the manhunt story in much the same way as they
became mesmerised by the O.J. Simpson car chase.

But as the New York sage Frank Rich observed this week, there are people who
care about the issue on both sides of US politics.

But "the vast middle seems to be indifferent - in part, I think, because we're
so used to surrendering our privacy, whether it be to social networking or
commerce sites or, you know, anything we do. We're inured to is - particularly
people under 50."

Obama's response to the suggestion that the intelligence services of the world
monitor his breakfast choices - "we're all spying on each other" - was more an
evasion than an invitation to the serious national debate he says America needs.

His "we're-no-worse-than-the-rest" self-justification sounded more like a grab
from a whacky Marvel comic than the leader of the world superpower explaining
why something dodgy had to be done.

But more than a decade after the September 11 attacks served as a licence for
the security establishment to do pretty well anything, the subsequent national
security state asks for the trust of the people.

This, when the likes of the National Security Agency which trusted Snowden with
its most closely held secrets and seems to have accepted at face value a
confirming tip-off from God knows who that the President of Bolivia was
smuggling Snowden halfway around the globe in his presidential jet.

Writing at Slate.com, Farhad Manjoo observes: "The scandal isn't just that the
government is spying on us. It's also that its giving guys like Snowden keys to
the spying program. It suggests the worst combination of overreach and
amateurishness, of power leveraged by incompetence.

"The Keystone Cops are listening to us all."

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: THREE PHOTOS: Winging it: (Clockwise from top left) Edward Snowden;
Bolivian president Evo Morales boards the presidential plane; US ambassador
Charles Rivkin. Photos: Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2013 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              230 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

THERE WILL BE MORE LIKE SNOWDEN;
Diplomatic rows and farcical airport spats over the fate of the NSA
whistleblower are obscuring his real political significance, says Bonnie Greer

BYLINE: Bonnie Greer

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1272 words


We arrived yesterday at an absurd moment in the saga of the American
whistleblower Edward Snowden. The presidential plane carrying Bolivia's Evo
Morales home from a conference in Moscow was searched during a stop-over in
Vienna on suspicion of carrying Snowden to 0asylum in Latin America. The
Bolivians declared that France, Italy, Spain and Portugal had refused to allow
the plane to enter their airspace, forcing it to land in Austria.

Bolivia, no friend of the US, accused European countries of doing the US's dirty
work. "We have no doubt that it was an order from the White House," Sacha
Llorenti, the country's ambassador to the UN, said. "By no means should a
diplomatic plane with the president be diverted from its route and forced to
land in another country."

France, Spain and Portugal subsequently denied that they had closed their
airspace. Austria insisted that President Morales had agreed to a voluntary
inspection of his plane; Austria's deputy chancellor, Michael Spindelegger,
said: "Our colleagues from the airport had a look and can give assurances that
no one is on board who is not a Bolivian citizen." Eventually, amid talk from
the Bolivians of an act of aggression and a violation of international law, the
plane was allowed to take off.

About 21 countries have become involved in Snowden's request for asylum. Five
have rejected granting Snowden asylum, seven have said they would consider a
request if made on their soil, and eight said they had either not made a
decision or not received a request. President Obama warned that any offer of
asylum to Snowden would carry a heavy cost.

Meanwhile, Snowden is believed still to be in Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow.
Russia has no extradition treaty with the US; President Putin has stated that
there is a possibility that Snowden could stay, but that he must not leak
information "against our American partners". He ended this statement by saying
that "this may sound surprising coming from my lips".

If you look at the photograph of presidents Obama and Putin at the G8 last
month, seated together at a press conference almost with their backs to one
another, it would be easy to assume that Snowden would provide a perfect
opportunity for Putin to wreak mischief and mayhem. This affair has provided,
instead, another chapter in the Game of Nations. And there sits Snowden, in a
Moscow transit lounge, the lead character in what must have been, to him, an act
that was straightforward: he had a personal mission to complete.

To many, particularly those on the centre-Right, the Snowden revelations are
interesting in the particular, but no big thing in the general. Of course we are
spied on, listened to, observed, the argument runs: what's new? London has more
security cameras per mile than any city on earth. You are likely to be captured
up to 500 times a day if you live in the West End as I do. Our smart phones have
become big data collectors, and as long as we've done nothing wrong, we have
nothing to hide.

Snowden is, to those who feel that way, another Lefty on the run; not worth
thinking about other than as an amusement, a bit of a divertissement in the
daily news bulletins.

Then there are those who argue that, while the US government should prosecute
Snowden, the media's focus on his personal life, his whereabouts, what he is
about to do next, draws attention away from more important issues: serious
questions about US government surveillance and how the Patriot Act and the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act are interpreted.

But they're wrong. Something new is revealing itself in the tale of Edward
Snowden and it is coming quickly into the general consciousness. Snowden is part
of the global town square, created by social media, which is effectively running
politics in Brazil, Egypt, Turkey, and will do so in the West, too.

Snowden, who spent his 30th birthday on the run, is one of a new breed I call
the "Libertarian Millennial". Apolitical, perhaps even post-political, they do
what they do because they have come to their own conclusions in their own time
and in their own way. "I don't want to live in a society that does these
[surveillance] sort of things... I do not want to live in a world where
everything I do and say is recorded," Snowden declares. There you have it: "I
don't", "I do not" and "everything I do and say" are the key phrases here.

Snowden is not like the main whistleblower of my youth, Daniel Ellsberg, who in
1971 leaked what became known as the Pentagon Papers, a defence department
history of American involvement in Vietnam. Ellsberg was steeped in the security
mechanisms of the United States; he knew what the consequences of his leak were.
He was a professional who saw what he did as part of what we, the young, were
doing in the streets. He pondered long and hard over his actions and, in doing
what he did, saw himself as part of something bigger, something collective.

In a sense, he took his permission from those of us who were against the Vietnam
War. Ellsberg came back to us as the vehicles who would take his action forward.
The press were largely on his side. They knew him, not necessarily in the
particular, but where he came from. They understood his intentions. He was not
alone.

At the trial of Bradley Manning, the US soldier accused of passing classified
material to the WikiLeaks website, attorneys are arguing over what the
prosecution calls Manning's "arrogance" and the defence call his "good
intentions". But Manning's actions fit neither of those definitions, as we
usually understand them. He and Snowden and other Millennials are empowered by
the tools that they are also at war with; it is these tools that are their
engines, the shapers of their consciousness. They are neither of the Left nor
the Right.

It is no surprise that Snowden contributed to the 2012 presidential campaign of
Ron Paul, who supports curtailing the powers of government. In his maverick
stance, and that of his son, Senator Rand Paul, the young find a model for
taking on the system as a personal quest. Snowden becomes, in his fight, what
Millennials look up to: a charismatic individual, who by sheer power of
self-belief can create support, even a movement.

The darker version of these charismatic individuals are the lone wolves who
commit their acts of terror in plain view.

In Boston, the hijacking of a car and the revelation of his crime to its
passenger was not simply a mistake or youthful stupidity on the part of the
alleged bomber who survived. Tweeting his whereabouts, his thoughts, his
feelings was apparently necessary to what he set out to do. Tweeting completed
the act. In Woolwich, the alleged killers of Drummer Shipley remained at the
scene seemingly in order to be filmed for YouTube.

In the world of the Libertarian Millennial, the act is not complete without
social media, without the bringing together of the crowd as receptor of their
personal feelings, their manifesto. And since it is embedded technology - which
we wear on our bodies or will even have implanted inside our bodies - that is
our future, more and more LMs will emerge, both as lone wolves - individuals out
to do maximum physical harm and wreak mayhem in the name of a religion or a
political ideology; or as charismatic individuals, people doing what they think
is right, and through that effort, rallying people and movements around them.

Snowden has been quoted as having written: "The consent of the governed is not
consent if it is not informed." And that "the truth is coming, and it cannot be
stopped." His breed of Libertarian Millennial is coming, too. It is they who
cannot be stopped.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caught on camera: Edward Snowden is believed to be still in
Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow
REUTERS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              231 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 4, 2013 Thursday 04:18 PM GMT+4

Russia cannot influence situation around Snowden until he makes up his mind -
Russian diplomat

LENGTH: 409 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 4


- Russia cannot influence the situation around National Security Service leaker
Edward Snowden until he makes up his mind, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister
Sergei Ryabkov said on Thursday, commenting on Snowden's prolonged stay at
Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport transit zone.

"Our stance is that we cannot decide anything for him until he takes this or
that decision, until he makes up his mind what is better for him," the Russian
diplomat said.

Two days ago, Russian president's press secretary Dmitry Peskov confirmed that
Snowden had asked to be allowed to stay in Russia but dropped his plans as soon
as learnt the conditions for that. "Indeed, Snowden made requests to stay in
Russia, but yesterday, upon learning Putin's position regarding the condition
under which he could stay, he dropped the request. At present, he doesn't wish
to stay in the Russian Federation," Peskov said adding that Snowden had sent
asylum requests to 15 countries.

Peskov reminded that the legal status of the former CIA employee is currently
determined by his staying in the airport's transit zone. In formal terms,
Snowden has not crossed the Russian border.

The presidential press secretary also stressed that the man had not been
contracted by Russian secret services. He "is not an agent of Russian secret
service," he stressed.

"Snowden sincerely believes or due to some other reasons thinks himself a human
rights activist and an advocate of ideas of democracy and human rights," Peskov
said. "It is recognized by Russian human rights activists and their colleagues
abroad."

Hypothetically, Snowden could stay in the Russian Federation on the condition
voiced by the Russian president, i.e. that he stops anti-American activity. "As
far as we know, he does not intend to stop it," the spokesman underlined.

Edward Snowden, 30, a former technical specialist at the CIA, leaked
informational on the existence of secret programs run by the U.S. National
Security Agency to intercept the telephone calls and Internet message exchanges
processed via servers on the U.S. territory. Snowden's revelations stirred a
global scandal that is only gaining force.

He made his revelations public while on a trip in Hong Kong where he took an
Aeroflot flight for Moscow on June 23. On the next day, he was supposed to fly
to Cuba but he did not get aboard the Aeroflot jet eventually. He is still
staying in the Sheremetyevo transit zone and taking effort to find political
asylum elsewhere.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              232 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                  Korea Times

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

Edward Snowden, a man without a country -

LENGTH: 413 words


Maybe by the time you read this, some obliging country will have given
intelligence leaker Edward Snowden asylum, perhaps with a tacit nod from the
United States that it's OK with Washington as long as the nation giving him
refuge makes him shut up.

Snowden is believed to have been stuck since June 23 in the transit lounge of
Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport. Washington Post columnist Anne
Applebaum, a specialist in Eastern Europe, recently described it as possibly
"the most soul-destroying, angst-inducing transportation hub in the world."

No wonder Snowden has applied for asylum in 21 countries, as Britain's Guardian
newspaper reports. These include Russia, which said yes - but with conditions
that Snowden would surely find unacceptable. Russian President Vladimir Putin,
who clearly wants Snowden somewhere else, said: "If he wants to stay here, there
is one condition: He must cease his activities aimed at inflicting damage on our
American partners, as strange as it may sound coming from my lips."

However, the former National Security Agency contractor's sole leverage is
whatever classified U.S. information he hasn't already leaked. In case Snowden
didn't get the hint, Putin said he was welcome to leave at any time.

The problem is finding someone who will take him. His country of first choice,
Ecuador, whose embassy has been sheltering Snowden's WikiLeaks patron, Julian
Assange, shows signs of having second thoughts about granting him asylum.

President Rafael Correa said he would consider a request only if Snowden reached
Ecuador or one of its embassies. However, Correa said his country would not
issue a travel document and all but apologized for his consulate in Hong Kong
issuing the travel permit that enabled Snowden to fly to Moscow. Correa said
giving Snowden a travel pass was a "mistake" for which the consular official
would be punished.

The next likeliest country is Venezuela. Its leftist president, Nicolas Maduro,
had fine words for Snowden - he has "done something very important for humanity"
- but no concrete promise of asylum.

Of the 21 countries, those that didn't say no outright said asylum was unlikely
or attached difficult conditions, such as requiring that Snowden be in the
country first before applying for refuge.

The one country openly willing to take in Snowden is the United States, but he
would have to face espionage charges here.

This article was published and distributed by Scripps Howard News Service
(www.shns.com).

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Korea Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              233 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             July 4, 2013 Thursday

bolivian presidentmorales' jet diverted due to Snowden suspicionsCountries close
their airspace on concerns whistle-blower may have been on board

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 767 words


Agence France-Presse

Moscow

Fugitive US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden's struggle to find a safe haven
sparked a diplomatic row yesterday after Bolivia President Evo Morales's plane
was diverted to Austria over suspicions he was on board.

The incident happened hours after Morales had said his country would consider a
request for political asylum if Snowden submitted one.

Bolivian Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca accused France and Portugal of
having denied airspace to the plane, forcing it to reroute over a "huge lie"
that Snowden was travelling with Morales.

Bolivian Defence Minister Ruben Saavedra said Italy had also closed its
airspace.

"The president was forced to land in Vienna," Choquehuanca told reporters in La
Paz, alleging that Morales's life had been put in danger by what he called a
forced emergency landing.

"There were unfounded rumours that Mr Snowden may have been on board the
aircraft," Choquehuanca said.

Morales had been on a visit to Moscow, where Snowden has been holed up in an
airport transit area since June 23. He is seeking to avoid US espionage charges
for revealing a vast surveillance programme to collect phone and Internet data.

Austrian foreign ministry spok- esman Alexander Schallenberg confirmed to AFP
that Morales' plane had landed in Vienna and that Snowden was not on board.

"President Morales will leave early Wednesday [yesterday] morning for La Paz,"
the Bolivian capital, he added.

Officials at the French foreign ministry and the Prime Minister's office said
overnight they knew nothing about the incident.

Saavedra later told Bolivian state media that France and Portugal had now
cleared Morales to continue his journey.

Bolivia is one of 21 nations to which Snowden has applied for asylum, according
to the website of the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks, which helped file the
requests.

Morales on Tuesday said he was open to taking in Snowden.

"If there were a request, of course we would be willing to debate and consider
the idea," he told Russia's state-run RT television in comments translated from
Spanish.

A spokesman for Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday Snowden had
withdrawn his application after Moscow made it clear the American would have to
stop leaking US intelligence activities if he wanted to stay.

A number of other countries on Snowden's list were quick to either reject his
application or give it a cool reaction.

Brazil and Poland rejected Snowden's asylum bid; while an Indian foreign
ministry said there was "no reason to accede to the request".

Austria, Finland, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway and Spain gave
technical reasons to explain that Snowden's request was invalid. A Chinese
foreign ministry spokesman in Beijing said they knew nothing about a bid apart
from media reports.

France and Switzerland said they had not yet received an application, while
Italy said it was "contemplating" the request.

Germany said the request would be reviewed "according to the law", while
Venezuela has expressed support for Snowden.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro, who like Morales was in Moscow for a
two-day energy summit, praised Snowden's actions in leaking information on US
spying activities.

"What is happening now should not be, he never killed anyone or planted any
bombs," he said.

Venezuela and regional allies Ecuador, Cuba and Nicaragua have rallied behind
Bolivia, voicing outrage over the plane diversion.

"This is an attack against President Morales's life," Venezuelan Foreign
Minister Elias Jaua said.

"We express our solidarity with Evo and the brave Bolivian people. Our America
cannot tolerate so much abuse," Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa said on
Twitter.

The Bolivian presidential palace said protest rallies were already planned
outside the embassies of the US, France, Portugal and Italy.

Snowden has remained quiet and out of sight of reporters since arriving at
Sheremetyevo Airport from Hong Kong.

Late on Monday, he delivered a blistering attack on the US, accusing Washington
of pressuring foreign leaders to refuse him refuge.

But State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said Washington was simply telling
countries that "Snowden has been accused of leaking classified information".

She added: "He is somebody that we would like to see returned to the United
States, of course. And we are hopeful that will happen."

Snowden's latest major leak about US spying on EU countries has angered many
European governments and threatened to derail preparations for delicate talks on
a huge free trade deal between Washington and Brussels.

EU ambassadors are due to discuss the issue in Brussels today.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              235 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Putin aloof on Snowden question;
Russia - Stranded - Asylum options for whistleblower, wanted by US, appear to be
narrowing

BYLINE: Paul McGeough Chief Correspondent Washington

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 496 words


Notwithstanding broad popular and political support in Moscow for granting
asylum to Edward Snowden, the self-admitted leaker of Washington's most closely
held global espionage secrets, Russian President Vladimir Putin seems to be
ruling it out as an option for the stranded Snowden.

Purportedly still "marooned" in the transit lounge at Sheremetyevo International
Airport, Mr Snowden made a formal application for asylum late on Sunday.

Though even after he lodged his documents, Russian officials claimed not to know
where he was staying - "she didn't say and I didn't ask," an airport consular
official told reporters after receiving the asylum application from Mr Snowden's
WikiLeaks handler, Sarah Harrison.

Of the 19 nations in which Mr Snowden has sought asylum, only Norway has so far
confirmed reception of an application.

Asked whether Mr Snowden had applied for asylum in Norway, foreign ministry
spokesman Frode Andersen said: "I can confirm that. We have received an asylum
application by fax to our embassy in Moscow late yesterday afternoon.

"It is probably from him and it is allegedly signed by him, but we have no way
of checking that."

Mr Snowden is now in his second week at the airport, though there has been no
confirmed sighting of him, and his options seem to be narrowing.

Ecuador's enthusiasm for his case is fading rapidly and Mr Putin appears to be
bent on playing with American sensitivities, but not necessarily obliging Mr
Snowden at the same time.

Amid such uncertainty, the cocksureness that was a hallmark of Mr Snowden's
early public comments is fading too, with a statement issued in his name by
WikiLeaks on Monday being marked by crankiness and a sense of disbelief that the
US would play hardball in its efforts to have him handed over.

The statement, posted on the WikiLeaks website, denounced President Barack Obama
for reducing Mr Snowden to a "stateless person" by revoking his passport and
took Vice-President Joe Biden to task for pressuring governments not to take Mr
Snowden.

"The Obama administration has now adopted a strategy of using citizenship as a
weapon - although I'm convicted of nothing, it has unilaterally revoked my
passport, leaving me a stateless person."

In filing for asylum in Russia and Norway, Mr Snowden also gave local officials
a list of 17 other countries in which he would wish to request asylum: Austria,
Bolivia, Brazil, China, Cuba, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Ireland,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Poland, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela.

Mr Putin told reporters: "If he wants to go somewhere and someone will take him,
go ahead. If he wants to stay here ..."

Mr Putin, himself a stranger to human rights as most would like to see them
practised, spoke as if he were the patron saint of activism. "Considering that [
Snowden] considers himself a human rights activist and a fighter for human
rights, he probably doesn't plan to stop this work, so he should choose a host
country and head there," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              237 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Snowden drops Russia asylum claim as Putin demands leaks stop

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 712  words


MOSCOW: Fugitive intelligence specialist Edward Snowden has abandoned his
request for political asylum in Russia after learning he would have to stop
leaking intelligence reports, the Kremlin said yesterday, as the American
awaited asylum decisions from 20 other countries.

Mr Snowden, who is holed up at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, has accused
Washington of pressuring foreign leaders to refuse him refuge as he tries to
evade justice for revealing a vast US spying program that has strained ties with
European allies.

``These are the old, bad tools of political aggression,'' he said in a statement
published by the anti-secrecy WikiLeaks website. ``Their purpose is to frighten,
not me but those who would come after me.''

WikiLeaks, which has been helping Snowden, said the 30-year-old had sent asylum
requests to 21 countries.

Russia, Norway, Austria and Poland were among the first to confirm they had
received the applications. Warsaw immediately rejected the request.

Mr Snowden's latest major leak about US spying on EU countries has angered many
governments and threatens to derail preparations for talks on a huge US-EU free
trade deal.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said yesterday Snowden was welcome to stay if
he stopped leaking US intelligence reports.

``If he (Snowden) wants to remain here there is one condition: he should stop
his work aimed at inflicting damage on our American partners, no matter how
strange this may sound coming from me,'' Mr Putin told reporters.

After learning of that condition, a Kremlin spokesman said Mr Snowden had
withdrawn his request. ``He abandoned his intention and his request to receive
the chance of staying in Russia,'' Mr Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, told
reporters.

Ecuador, the first place Mr Snowden applied for asylum, had earlier voiced
relief at the possibility of Russia taking him.

``My opinion is that the (asylum) request to the Russian government could
definitely resolve Mr Snowden's situation,'' President Rafael Correa said.

The Moscow dead end could increase pressure on Ecuador, which has hesitated in
the face of possible economic sanctions from the US.

Ecuador's London embassy is already harbouring WikiLeaks' founder Julian
Assange.

Mr Snowden had remained quiet and out of sight of reporters since arriving in
the transit zone of the airport from Hong Kong on June 23. He had planned to
travel on to Cuba the following day but never got on the flight because he
apparently lacked the proper boarding papers after his US travel passport was
revoked.

Breaking his silence for the first time since then, Mr Snowden said: ``Without
any judicial order, the administration now seeks to stop me exercising a basic
right. A right that belongs to everybody. The right to seek asylum.''

He also called Ecuador's treatment of those who stand up to the US ``an example
to the world''.

``There are few world leaders who would risk standing for the human rights of an
individual against the most powerful government on earth, and the bravery of
Ecuador and its people is an example to the world,'' he wrote in a letter to Mr
Correa that was obtained by Britain's Press Association.

WikiLeaks employee Sarah Harrison said asylum requests had also been sent to
Bolivia, Brazil, China, Cuba, France, Germany, India, Italy, Ireland, The
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela.

Mr Putin said Mr Snowden saw himself as a political crusader for moral justice
akin to 1975 Nobel Peace Prize-winning Soviet-era dissident Andrei Sakharov.

He suggested that this meant that Mr Snowden was unlikely to meet Russia's
condition of ending his leaks against the US.

``Because he feels like a rights activist and defender of human rights all
indications are that he is not going to stop this work. So he has to choose a
country of residence for himself and move there.''

Mr Peskov said Mr Snowden had personally informed Russian officials that he was
no longer interested in staying in Moscow.

But he also emphasised that Russia had no intention of handing the fugitive over
to the US.

``The handover of Snowden to a country like the United States that applies the
death penalty is impossible,'' he told reporters.

US President Barack Obama confirmed there were high-level talks between Moscow
and Washington over Mr Snowden.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              238 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                          SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION

Leaking credibility

BYLINE: NLVL

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 438 words


Remember when Edward Snowden's self-styled crusade was to strategically inform
the American people about supposed abuses by their government, to better equip
them to safeguard their constitutional rights? How far the fellow has fallen.

Sunday came Snowden's latest indiscriminate leak: that the National Security
Agency is allegedly eavesdropping on European Union offices in Washington and
Brussels.

Meaning, a spy agency is . . . spying!

A further development as the credibility crumbles: Snowden and WikiLeaks, Julian
Assange's band of information warriors, have more or less merged. Late Monday,
Assange's outfit released a statement, purportedly coming straight from Snowden
in Moscow.

In it, the fugitive leaker claimed that the Obama administration is "using
citizenship as a weapon" and complained that, by pressuring governments to deny
him asylum, President Obama is using "the extralegal penalty of exile."

This from a man who fled his country for China, then Russia, in order to do
dastardly business. Chutzpah.

Little wonder that some of Snowden's biggest backers have begun thinking twice
or thrice.

First there's Russian President Vladimir Putin, who had previously seemed to
relish the chance to irritate his American counterpart. Monday, he was careful
to put daylight between himself and the confessed criminal leaker: "There is one
condition if he wants to remain here: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
American partners, as strange as that sounds coming from my lips."

Apparently unwilling to keep that side of the bargain, Snowden withdrew his
asylum request with Russia.

Then there's Ecuador, thought to be Snowden's likely landing place because of
its fairly friendly history with Assange. So enamored is Snowden of Ecuador, he
just sent President Rafael Correa a laudatory letter expressing "my deep respect
for your principles and sincere thanks for your government's action in
considering my request for political asylum."

Tuesday, Correa wouldn't return the favor. He told The Guardian newspaper his
country is not considering Snowden's request for entry. Asked whether he wanted
to meet Snowden, Correa answered: "Not particularly. He's a very complicated
person. Strictly speaking, Mr. Snowden spied for some time."

Helping Snowden travel from Hong Kong to Moscow with a temporary travel pass
"was a mistake on our part," he added. Ouch.

Snowden is seeking asylum in nearly two-dozen countries. After getting rejection
after rejection, Bolivia began coming into focus as a potential destination. It
turns out trust is hard to come by when you make your name as a thief and
disseminator of vital secrets.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NLVL

DOCUMENT-TYPE: EDITORIAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


                              239 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

A provocateur, a pariah and a pawn; Holed up in a moscow airport, snowden's
legal limbo corrodes obama's credibility

BYLINE: William Marsden, Postmedia News

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Doors are closing on Edward Snowden. As he seeks asylum in 19 different
countries, the U.S. National Security Agency leaker who keeps on leaking is in
perpetual limbo.

Russia doesn't want him. "Mr. Snowden is a free man," Russian President Vladimir
Putin, the former lieutenant colonel in the KGB, told reporters Tuesday. "The
faster he chooses his ultimate destination the better it is for us." Then he
dismissed Snowden as a minor distraction, "the same as shearing a piglet. A lot
of squealing but very little wool."

Indeed, no welcome mat there. Still, Putin refused to surrender to heightened
U.S. demands for Snowden's return, noting that the two countries have no
extradition treaty.

India delivered an outright "no" to Snowden's pleas. Nor did Ecuador, Snowden's
original country of choice for asylum, seem eager. While it granted WikiLeaks
founder Julian Assange asylum at its London embassy, it now appears to have shut
the door on Snowden. Its president, Rafael Correa, said Monday that Snowden's
asylum request would be considered only if he could get himself to the South
American country.

The man who disclosed the extent of covert U.S. monitoring of its citizens'
phone calls and emails, as well as its wiretapping of European Union diplomats
and its hacking into China's government computers, has become at once a pariah
and a pawn to be used and abused on the international stage.

For two weeks he has been trapped in everybody's worst nightmare: an airport
(and a Moscow one at that).

The Russians refuse to grant him a visa to officially enter the country because
his U.S. passport has been cancelled.

Stateless, he can't find an airline that will take him anywhere. And even if a
willing country grants him safe haven, there is no guarantee it will last. In
the end, the FBI and its criminal indictment against Snowden for violating his
secrecy oath stands as the only surefire welcome mat on offer.

Whatever happens, Snowden is not likely to come out of this well. But neither is
U.S. President Barack Obama.

Obama's reaction to Snowden "is making the administration look ridiculous," said
Fred Cate, a law professor at Indiana University and legal adviser to the U.S.
government on privacy law.

"His first day in Africa (Obama) said he is not going to use the military to
track down a 30-year-old hacker, thereby giving the impression he wasn't that
worried about it - and the very next day we learn that he has been on the phone
with senior government officials around the world trying to deny Snowden a
refuge."

One minute Snowden is merely a tempest in a teapot. The next minute Obama is
sending the diplomatic equivalent of the U.S. seventh fleet after him. That's
some teapot.

There's no question Snowden has damaged the image of the Obama administration,
giving the Republicans plenty of ammunition with which to attack his weak
leadership. "The way, you know, Putin was conducting himself, he seems to be
coming across as a strong man and the president seems to just be flailing out,"
New York Republican Rep. Peter King told Fox News, for instance.

Snowden's revelations have deflated Obama's campaign against China as the
world's biggest hacker and greatest threat to the U.S. security and corporate
secrecy. They have raised tensions with the EU over the already touchy issue of
privacy. And they have discredited Obama's constant promises of transparency and
respect for individual privacy rights.

Snowden also has sparked a public debate on cyber privacy that no amount of
policy papers, lawsuits and law review articles have been able to provoke.

His revelation that the U.S. has bugged EU diplomats and hacked into EU
communications could make it harder to settle long-standing grievances over
privacy and tip the balance toward the EU's demand for tighter controls, Cate
said.

U.S. law does not provide any privacy protection to noncitizens, while EU law
does. Yet the two governments craft deals that allow them to share

financial data and airline passenger information. "I think this runs the risk
that in the short term the data protection authorities in Europe are going to
say, look these deals aren't valid, they aren't meaningful if we are not living
up to them, if we are conducting surveillance even while we are negotiating the
deals," Cate said.

"The fundamental structure of the (U.S.) law treats the EU and the Taliban
exactly the same.

"They are all lumped into the same category."

Imprisoned in Moscow's airport, Snowden still has his laptop and Internet
connection.

Obama must have a pretty good idea of what Snowden has on that laptop. As an
anxious White House tightens the screws, Obama has to be worried about Snowden's
next leak.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Vincent Yu, The Associated Press; Edward Snowden, a former NSA
contractor who leaked top-secret documents, has thus far sought asylum in 19
countries.; Efrem Lukatsky, The Associated Press;  Activists from Ukraine's
Internet party demand U.S. authorities cease their pursuit of Snowden at a
protest near the U.S. embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, on June 27.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              240 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

Front: Snowden running out of asylum options

BYLINE: Miriam Elder in Moscow

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 681 words


Edward Snowden's hopes of finding refuge from prosecution appeared to be
dwindling as country after country denied the US whistleblower's requests to
seek political asylum.

Snowden sought political asylum from 21 countries, according to WikiLeaks,
passing his requests to Russian officials from his hideaway in Moscow's
Sheremetyevo airport. Several countries replied with a flat out "no", including
Brazil, India, Norway and Poland. "I will not give a positive recommendation,"
the Polish foreign minister, Radoslaw Sikorski, wrote on his Twitter account.

A spokesman for the Indian foreign ministry tweeted: "Following careful
examination, we have concluded that we see no reason to accede to the Snowden
request." To add insult to injury, Brazil said it did not feel Snowden's request
deserved a response.

An enraged US has warned countries against accepting Snowden, who they are
seeking on charges that he violated the espionage act when he leaked classified
documents outlining the National Security Agency's surveillance programmes.

Officials from many countries said Snowden would have to be on their territory
to properly apply for asylum, a major stumbling block as the whistleblower has
been stripped of his US passport and remains confined inside the airport without
travel documents.

He arrived in Moscow from Hong Kong last week on travel documents issued by
Ecuador, but that country's officials have since rolled back their support.
Rafael Correa, Ecuador's president, said on Monday that providing Snowden with
those documents had been "a mistake".

"The right of asylum request is one thing but helping someone travel from one
country to another - Ecuador has never done this," he said.

Ecuador was one of nearly a dozen countries that replied to Snowden's overtures
by saying he would have to apply from their territory. Others include Austria,
Finland, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain and
Switzerland.

The German foreign minister, Guido Westerwelle, said it would review the asylum
request "according to the law", although he "could not imagine" that it would be
approved.

Several more countries - China, Cuba, Iceland, France, Italy and Nicaragua -
have yet to respond. Last night Bolivia emerged as one possible destination,
although the president, Evo Morales, said his country had not received a
request. "If there were a request, of course we would be willing to debate and
consider the idea," Morales told the Spanish language RT Actualidad.

Snowden has also pinned hopes on Venezuela, whose president, Nicolas Maduro, was
in Moscow with Morales yesterday for a summit of gas-producing countries. Maduro
praised Snowden's leaks on US surveillance programmes while coyly addressing his
chances of asylum in Caracas. "We think this young person has done something
very important for humanity . . . has spoken great truths to deconstruct a world
. . . controlled by an imperialist American elite," Maduro said.

Asked whether he would take Snowden back to Venezuela with him, Maduro answered:
"What we're taking with us are multiple agreements that we're signing with
Russia, including oil and gas."

Venezuela may remain Snowden's best chance after his decision to cancel his
asylum request with Russia. According to Vladimir Putin's spokesman, Dmitry
Peskov, he cancelled the request after hearing Putin's statement that he would
only be welcome if he stopped "his work aimed at bringing harm" to the US. "
Snowden really asked to remain in Russia," Peskov said. "Learning yesterday of
Russia's position . . . he abandoned his intentions and his request."

In a statement released via WikiLeaks , Snowden said the US was "using
citizenship as a weapon" and putting countries where he applied for asylum under
undue pressure. Meanwhile the whistleblower's father, Lonnie Snowden, has
written an open letter praising his son for "summoning the American people to
confront the growing danger of tyranny".

Captions:

Vladimir Putin greets Evo Morales in Moscow yesterday. Morales said Bolivia
would consider a Snowden asylum request Photograph: Maxim Shemetov/Getty

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              241 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       July 3, 2013 Wednesday 6:17 PM GMT

Edward Snowden saga: Bolivia accuses Europe of 'kidnapping' Bolivian president
in forcing Evo Morales' plane to land in Vienna;
French officials deny refusing to let Bolivian president's plane cross its
airspace as fugitive is not found on board

BYLINE: Shaun Walker, Heather Saul

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 812 words


Bolivia has accused Austria of "kidnapping" their president after refusing to
allow a plane carrying Evo Morales into their airspace amid suggestions NSA
whistleblower Edward Snowden was on board.

"We're talking about the president on an official trip after an official summit
being kidnapped," Bolivia's ambassador to the United Nations in New York, Sacha
Llorenti Soliz, told reporters in Geneva on Wednesday.

"We have no doubt that it was an order from the White House," ambassador
Llorenti said. "By no means should a diplomatic plane with the president be
diverted from its route and forced to land in another country."

Bolivia has also accused European states of an "act of aggression" and "an
offence against the whole Latin region" over the affair and has asked for a
crisis meeting of South American leaders after officials expressed outrage at Mr
Morales' treatment.

Bolivian Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca blamed the forced stopover in
Vienna on "unfounded suspicions that Mr Snowden was on the plane".

"We don't know who invented this lie," Mr Choquehuanca said in La Paz. "We want
to express our displeasure because this has put the president's life at risk."

However, Deputy Chancellor Michael Spindelegger said that President Evo Morales
had agreed to the inspection. He confirmed Edward Snowden was not on board when
Mr Morales' plane was diverted on a flight from Russia and forced to land in
Austria over suspicions that Snowden could have been inside.

Speaking to reporters at the airport, Mr Spindelegger said: "Our colleagues from
the airport had a look and can give assurances that no one is on board who is
not a Bolivian citizen."

The plane carrying the Bolivian president finally took off from Vienna's airport
to continue it's journey shortly before noon on Wednesday.

Bolivia claimed that France, Portugal, Spain and Italy blocked the plane from
flying over their territories, forcing the unscheduled stopover in Vienna. There
was no evidence that Mr Snowden, wanted by Washington for espionage after
divulging classified details of US phone and Internet surveillance, had left the
transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.

French officials denied on Wednesday that France refused to let the Bolivian
president's plane cross over its airspace amid suspicions that Mr Snowden was
aboard. Spain, too, said the plane was free to cross its territory.

According to the anti-secrecy organisation WikiLeaks, Mr Snowden applied for
asylum in 21 countries, with letters passed to Russian officials who met him at
his secret location in the Moscow airport, where he has stayed since fleeing
Hong Kong, where the US attempted to launch an extradition bid. The US has
charged the former intelligence contractor with violating espionage laws for
leaking classified information about US surveillance operations.

As Mr Snowden, 30, prepared to spend his 10th night at the airport, he was
dealing with outright rejections from Brazil and India. Finland, Ireland,
Austria, Norway and Spain said requests for asylum have to be made in person on
their territories to be considered. The Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw
Sikorski wrote on Twitter that he would "not give a positive recommendation" to
the request.

Mr Snowden's most likely destination had initially appeared to be Ecuador, but
President Rafael Correa has sharply backtracked in recent days, describing the
issue of the temporary travel pass that allowed Mr Snowden to depart Hong Kong
for Moscow by Ecuador's London Consul as a "mistake". He has not completely
ruled out asylum for Mr Snowden, but has said the American would need to reach
Ecuadorian territory before any request could be considered, which currently
does not seem possible.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has said that he would consider an asylum
request from Mr Snowden, but suggestions that the Latin American leader, who is
in Moscow for an international gas forum, might spirit Mr Snowden away on his
presidential jet appeared unfounded. He did speak out in favour of the
whistleblower. "He deserves the world's protection," Mr Maduro said. "What has
he done? Did he launch a missile and kill someone? Did he rig a bomb and kill
someone? No. He is preventing war."

There have been no confirmed sightings of Mr Snowden since he landed in Moscow
on 30 June, leading many to believe he is being guarded by Russian security
agents, although President Vladimir Putin has denied this. It had seemed that
Russia might be preparing to offer shelter after Mr Snowden handed an asylum
application to the duty consul at Sheremetyevo on Sunday. President Vladimir
Putin said Russia could offer Mr Snowden asylum on the condition that the
whistleblower stopped leaking information "harmful" to the US. Mr Putin's
spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that this condition had been too much for the
stranded American, who had then withdrawn his application.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              243 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       July 3, 2013 Wednesday 1:23 PM GMT

Edward Snowden saga: Bolivia accuses Europe of 'kidnapping' Bolivian president
for forcing Evo Morales' plane to land in Vienna;
French officials deny refusing to let Bolivian president's plane cross its
airspace as fugitive is not found on board

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 795 words


Bolivia has accused Austria of "kidnapping" the Bolivian president after the
plane carrying him was stranded in Vienna and authorities searched his plane
amid suggestions NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden was on board.

"We're talking about the president on an official trip after an official summit
being kidnapped," Bolivia's ambassador to the United Nations in New York, Sacha
Llorenti Soliz, told reporters in Geneva on Wednesday.

"We have no doubt that it was an order from the White House," ambassador
Llorenti said. "By no means should a diplomatic plane with the president be
diverted from its route and forced to land in another country."

Bolivia has asked for a crisis meeting of South American leaders after officials
expressed outrage at Mr Morales' treatment.

Bolivian Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca blamed the forced stopover in
Vienna on "unfounded suspicions that Mr Snowden was on the plane".

"We don't know who invented this lie," Mr Choquehuanca said in La Paz. "We want
to express our displeasure because this has put the president's life at risk."

However, Deputy Chancellor Michael Spindelegger said that President Evo Morales
had agreed to the inspection. He confirmed Edward Snowden was not on board when
Mr Morales' plane was diverted on a flight from Russia and forced to land in
Austria over suspicions that Snowden could have been inside.

Speaking to reporters at the airport, Mr Spindelegger said: "Our colleagues from
the airport had a look and can give assurances that no one is on board who is
not a Bolivian citizen."

The plane carrying the Bolivian president finally took off from Vienna's airport
to continue it's journey shortly before noon on Wednesday.

Bolivia claimed that France, Portugal, Spain and Italy blocked the plane from
flying over their territories, forcing the unscheduled stopover in Vienna. There
was no evidence that Mr Snowden, wanted by Washington for espionage after
divulging classified details of US phone and Internet surveillance, had left the
transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.

French officials denied on Wednesday that France refused to let the Bolivian
president's plane cross over its airspace amid suspicions that Mr Snowden was
aboard. Spain, too, said the plane was free to cross its territory.

According to the anti-secrecy organisation WikiLeaks, Mr Snowden applied for
asylum in 21 countries, with letters passed to Russian officials who met him at
his secret location in the Moscow airport, where he has stayed since fleeing
Hong Kong, where the US attempted to launch an extradition bid. The US has
charged the former intelligence contractor with violating espionage laws for
leaking classified information about US surveillance operations.

As Mr Snowden, 30, prepared to spend his 10th night at the airport, he was
dealing with outright rejections from Brazil and India. Finland, Ireland,
Austria, Norway and Spain said requests for asylum have to be made in person on
their territories to be considered. The Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw
Sikorski wrote on Twitter that he would "not give a positive recommendation" to
the request.

Mr Snowden's most likely destination had initially appeared to be Ecuador, but
President Rafael Correa has sharply backtracked in recent days, describing the
issue of the temporary travel pass that allowed Mr Snowden to depart Hong Kong
for Moscow by Ecuador's London Consul as a "mistake". He has not completely
ruled out asylum for Mr Snowden, but has said the American would need to reach
Ecuadorian territory before any request could be considered, which currently
does not seem possible.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has said that he would consider an asylum
request from Mr Snowden, but suggestions that the Latin American leader, who is
in Moscow for an international gas forum, might spirit Mr Snowden away on his
presidential jet appeared unfounded. He did speak out in favour of the
whistleblower. "He deserves the world's protection," Mr Maduro said. "What has
he done? Did he launch a missile and kill someone? Did he rig a bomb and kill
someone? No. He is preventing war."

There have been no confirmed sightings of Mr Snowden since he landed in Moscow
on 30 June, leading many to believe he is being guarded by Russian security
agents, although President Vladimir Putin has denied this. It had seemed that
Russia might be preparing to offer shelter after Mr Snowden handed an asylum
application to the duty consul at Sheremetyevo on Sunday. President Vladimir
Putin said Russia could offer Mr Snowden asylum on the condition that the
whistleblower stopped leaking information "harmful" to the US. Mr Putin's
spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that this condition had been too much for the
stranded American, who had then withdrawn his application.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              244 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                      July 3, 2013 Wednesday 12:47 PM GMT

Edward Snowden saga: Bolivia accuses Europe of 'act of aggression' for forcing
Evo Morales' plane to land in Vienna;
French officials deny refusing to let Bolivian president's plane cross its
airspace as fugitive is not found on board

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 776 words


Bolivia has accused European states of an "act of aggression" and "an offence
against the whole Latin region" for refusing to allow a plane carrying their
president into their airspace amid suggestions NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden
was on board.

Bolivia's ambassador to the United Nations Sacha Llorentty Soliz told reporters
in Geneva on Wednesday Austria's decision to search the plane was a violation of
international law. The envoy said he had no doubt that the orders to divert
Morales' plane came from the United States. Bolivia has asked for a crisis
meeting of South American leaders after officials expressed outrage at Mr
Morales' treatment.

Bolivian Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca blamed the forced stopover in
Vienna on "unfounded suspicions that Mr Snowden was on the plane".

"We don't know who invented this lie," Mr Choquehuanca said in La Paz. "We want
to express our displeasure because this has put the president's life at risk."

However, Deputy Chancellor Michael Spindelegger said that President Evo Morales
had agreed to the inspection. He confirmed Edward Snowden was not on board when
Mr Morales' plane was diverted on a flight from Russia and forced to land in
Austria over suspicions that Snowden could have been inside.

Speaking to reporters at the airport, Mr Spindelegger said: "Our colleagues from
the airport had a look and can give assurances that no one is on board who is
not a Bolivian citizen."

The plane carrying the Bolivian president finally took off from Vienna's airport
to continue it's journey shortly before noon on Wednesday.

Bolivia claimed that France, Portugal, Spain and Italy blocked the plane from
flying over their territories, forcing the unscheduled stopover in Vienna. There
was no evidence that Mr Snowden, wanted by Washington for espionage after
divulging classified details of US phone and Internet surveillance, had left the
transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.

French officials denied on Wednesday that France refused to let the Bolivian
president's plane cross over its airspace amid suspicions that Mr Snowden was
aboard. Spain, too, said the plane was free to cross its territory.

According to the anti-secrecy organisation WikiLeaks, Mr Snowden applied for
asylum in 21 countries, with letters passed to Russian officials who met him at
his secret location in the Moscow airport, where he has stayed since fleeing
Hong Kong, where the US attempted to launch an extradition bid. The US has
charged the former intelligence contractor with violating espionage laws for
leaking classified information about US surveillance operations.

As Mr Snowden, 30, prepared to spend his 10th night at the airport, he was
dealing with outright rejections from Brazil and India. Finland, Ireland,
Austria, Norway and Spain said requests for asylum have to be made in person on
their territories to be considered. The Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw
Sikorski wrote on Twitter that he would "not give a positive recommendation" to
the request.

Mr Snowden's most likely destination had initially appeared to be Ecuador, but
President Rafael Correa has sharply backtracked in recent days, describing the
issue of the temporary travel pass that allowed Mr Snowden to depart Hong Kong
for Moscow by Ecuador's London Consul as a "mistake". He has not completely
ruled out asylum for Mr Snowden, but has said the American would need to reach
Ecuadorian territory before any request could be considered, which currently
does not seem possible.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has said that he would consider an asylum
request from Mr Snowden, but suggestions that the Latin American leader, who is
in Moscow for an international gas forum, might spirit Mr Snowden away on his
presidential jet appeared unfounded. He did speak out in favour of the
whistleblower. "He deserves the world's protection," Mr Maduro said. "What has
he done? Did he launch a missile and kill someone? Did he rig a bomb and kill
someone? No. He is preventing war."

There have been no confirmed sightings of Mr Snowden since he landed in Moscow
on 30 June, leading many to believe he is being guarded by Russian security
agents, although President Vladimir Putin has denied this. It had seemed that
Russia might be preparing to offer shelter after Mr Snowden handed an asylum
application to the duty consul at Sheremetyevo on Sunday. President Vladimir
Putin said Russia could offer Mr Snowden asylum on the condition that the
whistleblower stopped leaking information "harmful" to the US. Mr Putin's
spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that this condition had been too much for the
stranded American, who had then withdrawn his application.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              245 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       July 3, 2013 Wednesday 8:59 AM GMT

Bolivian president Evo Morales' plane diverted to Vienna amid suspicions NSA
whistleblower Edward Snowden is on board;
France and Portugal abruptly cancelled air permits for Morales' plane

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 528 words


Bolivia said President Evo Morales' plane was diverted on a flight from Russia
and forced to land in Austria over suspicions that Edward Snowden might be on
board, as countries across the globe rejected the American whistleblower's
asylum applications.

France and Portugal abruptly cancelled air permits for Morales' plane, forcing
the unscheduled stopover in Vienna.

There was no evidence that Snowden, wanted by Washington for espionage after
divulging classified details of U.S. phone and Internet surveillance, had left
the transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.

An Austrian Foreign Ministry official said rumours that Snowden was on the plane
were untrue.

According to the anti-secrecy organisation WikiLeaks, Mr Snowden applied for
asylum in 21 countries, with letters passed to Russian officials who met him at
his secret location in the Moscow airport, where he has stayed since fleeing
Hong Kong, where the US attempted to launch an extradition bid. The US has
charged the former intelligence contractor with violating espionage laws for
leaking classified information about US surveillance operations.

As Mr Snowden, 30, prepared to spend his 10th night at the airport, he was
dealing with outright rejections from Brazil and India. Finland, Ireland,
Austria, Norway and Spain said requests for asylum have to be made in person on
their territories to be considered. The Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw
Sikorski wrote on Twitter that he would "not give a positive recommendation" to
the request.

Mr Snowden's most likely destination had initially appeared to be Ecuador, but
President Rafael Correa has sharply backtracked in recent days, describing the
issue of the temporary travel pass that allowed Mr Snowden to depart Hong Kong
for Moscow by Ecuador's London Consul as a "mistake". He has not completely
ruled out asylum for Mr Snowden, but has said the American would need to reach
Ecuadorian territory before any request could be considered, which currently
does not seem possible.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has said that he would consider an asylum
request from Mr Snowden, but suggestions that the Latin American leader, who is
in Moscow for an international gas forum, might spirit Mr Snowden away on his
presidential jet appeared unfounded. He did speak out in favour of the
whistleblower. "He deserves the world's protection," Mr Maduro said. "What has
he done? Did he launch a missile and kill someone? Did he rig a bomb and kill
someone? No. He is preventing war."

There have been no confirmed sightings of Mr Snowden since he landed in Moscow
on 30 June, leading many to believe he is being guarded by Russian security
agents, although President Vladimir Putin has denied this. It had seemed that
Russia might be preparing to offer shelter after Mr Snowden handed an asylum
application to the duty consul at Sheremetyevo on Sunday. President Vladimir
Putin said Russia could offer Mr Snowden asylum on the condition that the
whistleblower stopped leaking information "harmful" to the US. Mr Putin's
spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that this condition had been too much for the
stranded American, who had then withdrawn his application.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              249 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

Venezuela hedges on taking in Snowden;
Ex-N.S.A. worker needs protection, but asylum is not assured, leader says

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN, ANDREW ROTH and ELLEN BARRY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1847 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

President Nicolás Maduro said that Edward J. Snowden, who is wanted by the U.S.
authorities, deserved international protection but that Russia bore more
responsibility for him.

FULL TEXT

President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela said Tuesday that he had not yet received
an application for political asylum from Edward J. Snowden, the former National
Security Agency contractor who is on the run from the U.S. authorities, and that
he would not use his plane to ferry Mr. Snowden to Caracas.

Still, Mr. Maduro, who is visiting Moscow, seemed to hold out the possibility
that Venezuela might agree to shelter Mr. Snowden. Speaking to legislators and
reporters at the Russian Parliament, Mr. Maduro said Mr. Snowden deserved
protection under international law.

''He did not kill anyone, and he did not plant a bomb,'' Mr. Maduro said,
according to Russian news services. ''He only said a big truth to prevent
wars.''

On Monday, Mr. Snowden appeared to break his silence for the first time since
flying to Moscow eight days earlier, with WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy group,
issuing a statement attributed to him that denounced President Barack Obama for
revoking his U.S. passport, opposing his asylum requests and leaving him a
''stateless person.''

The statement posted on the Web site of WikiLeaks, which has been assisting Mr.
Snowden, accused Mr. Obama and the U.S. government of seeking to intimidate him
and deceive the world because of his disclosures about the global surveillance
efforts of U.S. intelligence agencies.

The statement attributed to Mr. Snowden cited Mr. Obama's assertion last week
that he would not permit any diplomatic ''wheeling and dealing'' with other
countries that may wish to grant him asylum. But, it said, Vice President Joseph
R. Biden Jr. has been pressuring ''the leaders of nations from which I have
requested protection to deny my asylum petitions.''

Mr. Biden telephoned President Rafael Correa of Ecuador last week and asked him
not to grant Mr. Snowden asylum, Mr. Correa said Saturday.

''The Obama administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as
a weapon,'' said the statement attributed to Mr. Snowden. ''Although I am
convicted of nothing, it has unilaterally revoked my passport, leaving me a
stateless person. Without any judicial order, the administration now seeks to
stop me exercising a basic right. A right that belongs to everybody. The right
to seek asylum.''

A later post, which appeared Tuesday on the WikiLeaks Web site, said that Sarah
Harrison, the group's legal adviser in the Snowden matter, had ''submitted by
hand a number of requests for asylum and asylum assistance on behalf'' of Mr.
Snowden to 19 countries. They were listed as Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, China,
Cuba, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Russia, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela.

Norway has said he is unlikely to get asylum there, Brazil ruled out answering
his request and Poland said it would not give a ''positive recommendation'' to
any application, Reuters reported. Finland, Spain, Ireland and Austria said he
had to be in their countries to make a request, while India said ''we see no
reason'' to accept his petition. France said it had not received a request and
the Chinese Foreign Ministry's spokeswoman said she had no information on Mr.
Snowden's asylum request, Reuters said.

As an international oil and gas forum convened in Moscow on Monday, there had
been speculation that President Vladimir V. Putin and Mr. Maduro would use the
opportunity to negotiate terms for Mr. Snowden to leave the transit area at
Sheremetyevo Airport, outside Moscow, where he arrived from Hong Kong on June
23. He had apparently intended to board a connecting flight headed for Latin
America. In the interim, the United States announced that his passport had been
revoked, leaving him in a geopolitical limbo.

Russia enjoys warm ties with Venezuela, a major arms customer and energy
partner, which sees the alliance as a way of countering the United States'
influence in Latin America.

The newspaper Izvestia speculated Monday that Mr. Maduro could spirit Mr.
Snowden away on his presidential plane when he leaves Russia on Tuesday,
arranging to take off from Sheremetyevo instead of a government facility at
Vnukovo Airport. But at a news conference Monday, Mr. Putin responded blankly to
that theory.

''As to the possible departure of Mr. Snowden with some official delegation,''
he said, ''I know nothing.''

Even as Mr. Maduro seemed to hedge about Venezuela's intentions, a spokesman for
Mr. Putin confirmed that Mr. Snowden on Monday had submitted asylum requests to
several countries. The spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, however, said that Mr.
Snowden had rescinded his request for asylum in Russia.

''He has abandoned his intention and his request for the opportunity to remain
in Russia,'' Mr. Peskov said on a conference call with a small group of
reporters in Moscow. At the same time, however, Mr. Peskov reiterated that
Russia had no intention of extraditing Mr. Snowden to the United States, where
the death penalty is a possibility for him if he is convicted.

On Monday, Kim N. Shevchenko, the Russian consul at Sheremetyevo Airport, said
that Mr. Snowden's traveling companion had hand-delivered an asylum request to
the consular office in Terminal F of the airport and that it had been passed on
to the Foreign Ministry.

The request had threatened to deeply complicate Russia's position in Mr.
Snowden's case, potentially making it impossible to maintain the mostly neutral
position that Mr. Putin has sought to stake out since Mr. Snowden landed in
Moscow. The Russian Constitution gives the president direct authority over
asylum requests.

At his news conference Monday, Mr. Putin tried to thread the needle, saying Mr.
Snowden was welcome to stay in Russia as long as he stopped publishing
classified documents that hurt the United States' interests. He went on to
acknowledge that this was unlikely to happen.

''If he wants to go somewhere and they accept him, please, be my guest,'' Mr.
Putin said. ''If he wants to stay here, there is one condition: He must cease
his work aimed at inflicting damage to our American partners, as strange as it
may sound from my lips.''

He added, ''Because he sees himself as a human-rights activist and a freedom
fighter for people's rights, apparently he is not intending to cease this work.
So he must choose for himself a country to go to, and where to move. When that
will happen, I unfortunately don't know.''

Mr. Putin's comments reflected an increasingly sober view of the outcome if Mr.
Snowden remains in Russia. For the second time, he took pains to say that Mr.
Snowden had not been recruited by Russian intelligence - an impression that
could corrode Mr. Snowden's image as a truth-teller and drive away some
supporters.

''He sees himself not as a former agent of a special service but as a fighter
for human rights, a sort of a new dissident, someone similar to Sakharov, on a
different scale, though,'' Mr. Putin said. ''But nevertheless, at his core he is
a fighter for human rights, for democracy.'' The reference was to the Soviet
dissident Andrei D. Sakharov.

While Mr. Snowden remains at Sheremetyevo, the United States has engaged an
array of countries that have considered granting him asylum, making clear that
doing so would carry big costs.

Ecuador, the country that is sheltering the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange,
has distanced itself, with top officials saying that they cannot consider Mr.
Snowden's asylum request unless he is in Ecuador or one of the country's
embassies abroad and that Russia bore the most responsibility for his fate.

Mr. Putin's spokesman said as recently as Sunday that Mr. Snowden's case ''was
not one on the Kremlin's agenda,'' noting that Sheremetyevo's transit zone is
legally not the part of territory of the Russian Federation.

''Snowden himself is in a pretty difficult situation,'' said Dmitri V. Trenin,
director of the Carnegie Moscow Center. ''I think he was following Assange's
advice trying to get to Ecuador, but then Ecuador, and, indirectly, Cuba, have
failed him. I think Venezuela is talking to the U.S. as well. The U.S. can offer
things to Venezuela.''

A parade of public figures - including human rights activists, pro-Kremlin
figures, Communists, nationalists and Parliament members - had made statements
in favor of granting him asylum. As anchors read reports on Mr. Snowden's case
on a popular news program Monday night, a vivid blue-and-red backdrop read
''Betray Snowden - Betray Freedom'' and showed Mr. Obama wearing headphones, a
visual reference to the surveillance programs Mr. Snowden has revealed.

''To be honest, I can't see any problem there,'' Ivan Melnikov, one of the
leaders of Russia's Communist Party, told Interfax. ''If the problem is
hysterics from the United States, they ought to remember that, historically
speaking, granting political asylum to figures like Snowden is normal historical
practice, and there's no reason for Russia to be embarrassed and drop out.''

At a round table on Monday, a prominent leader of United Russia, the main
pro-Kremlin party, said Mr. Snowden ''has done no less to win the Nobel Prize
than Barack Obama.'' Kirill Kabanov, a member of the presidential human rights
council, described Mr. Snowden as a man who ''tried to save the world.''

Sergei A. Markov, a pro-Kremlin analyst, said that if Mr. Snowden received
asylum, he could acquire a Russian transit document and leave the country, or
else remain in the country as a public figure, which he said would be ''very
good for public relations, he will be like Gérard Depardieu.'' Mr. Depardieu,
the French actor, sought Russian citizenship to avoid taxes in his home country.

Mr. Markov said Russian leaders had spent several days weighing their options
and taking a measure of domestic public opinion. The result, he said, was ''more
or less consensus over this issue.''

Damage from Mr. Snowden's disclosures of U.S. spying on the country's European
and Asian allies spread on Monday, threatening negotiations on a free trade
agreement, hurting Mr. Obama's standing in Europe and raising basic questions of
trust among countries that have been on friendly terms for generations.

President François Hollande of France issued some of the harshest language yet
from a European leader on the issue, telling reporters that ''we cannot accept
this kind of behavior between partners and allies'' and suggesting that talks on
the trade pact, scheduled to start next week, should be delayed at least until
questions over the spying issue were resolved and confidence was restored.

It was not so much the fact of the spying as its sheer scale that alarmed
European leaders and others. Elmar Brok, an outspoken German who is chairman of
the European Parliament's foreign affairs committee, said that ''the spying has
reached dimensions that I did not think were possible for a democratic
country.'' He said the United States had ''lost all balance - George Orwell is
nothing by comparison.''

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              250 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

As Snowden looks for asylum, doors slam around the world

BYLINE: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and ANDREW ROTH

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1445 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

Only Venezuela and Bolivia appeared to offer a hint of hope for the former
National Security Agency contractor who is on the run from U.S. authorities.

FULL TEXT

Asylum options appeared to narrow further on Tuesday for Edward J. Snowden, the
former National Security Agency contractor on the run from U.S. authorities, as
at least nine countries reacted unfavorably to his requests for sanctuary and
the Kremlin said he had withdrawn his application to Russia.

Only Venezuela and Bolivia appeared to offer him a hint of hope for a way out of
his limbo inside the international airport transit lounge at Sheremetyevo
airport, near Moscow, where he has been ensconced out of public view for nine
days.

President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, visiting Russia, said that while he had
not yet received an application from Mr. Snowden and would not use his plane to
ferry Mr. Snowden home with him, he held out the possibility that Venezuela
might ultimately agree to shelter Mr. Snowden.

Speaking to legislators and reporters at the Russian Parliament, Mr. Maduro said
that Mr. Snowden deserved protection under international law.

''He did not kill anyone and he did not plant a bomb,'' Mr. Maduro said,
according to Russian news services. ''He only said a big truth to prevent
wars.''

The president of Bolivia, Evo Morales, signaled that Mr. Snowden would be
welcome there as well.

But Austria, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Norway and Spain said that requests for
asylum must be made in person on their territories and that, therefore, Mr.
Snowden had not properly submitted an application. India and Brazil said they
had rejected Mr. Snowden's request. Poland said that it had received an
application that was not properly submitted, but that it would have been
rejected in any event.

Officials in Italy, which also received an asylum application, said they were
evaluating the request. But there was little expectation that Italy would grant
Mr. Snowden's it.

Mr. Snowden, 30, has been charged in the United States with violations of
espionage laws for leaking classified information about the global surveillance
operations of U.S. intelligence agencies. WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy group that
has been assisting Mr. Snowden, has described him as a whistle-blower who
exposed American abuses of privacy. The Obama administration has described him
as a hacker who should be extradited and prosecuted.

As an international oil and gas forum convened here on Monday, there had been
speculation that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and Mr. Maduro would use
the opportunity to negotiate terms for Mr. Snowden to leave the Sheremetyevo
transit area, his home since arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

He had apparently intended to board a connecting flight headed for Latin
America. In the interim, the United States announced that his American passport
had been revoked, leaving him in a geopolitical limbo, stripped of any valid
travel document and unable to leave the transit zone.

Russia enjoys warm ties with Venezuela, a major arms customer and energy
partner, which sees the alliance as a way of countering the United States'
influence in Latin America.

The newspaper Izvestia speculated Monday that Mr. Maduro could spirit Mr.
Snowden away on his presidential plane when he left Russia on Tuesday, arranging
to take off from Sheremetyevo instead of a government facility at Vnukovo
Airport.

But at a news conference on Monday, Mr. Putin responded blankly to that theory.

''As to the possible departure of Mr. Snowden with some official delegation,''
he said, ''I know nothing.''

Even as Mr. Maduro seemed to hedge about Venezuela's intentions, a spokesman for
Mr. Putin, Dmitri S. Peskov, confirmed that Mr. Snowden on Monday had submitted
asylum requests to other countries but had rescinded his request for asylum in
Russia.

''He has abandoned his intention and his request for the opportunity to remain
in Russia,'' Mr. Peskov said on a conference call with a small group of
reporters in Moscow. At the same time, however, Mr. Peskov reiterated that
Russia had no intention of extraditing Mr. Snowden to the United States, where
the death penalty is a possibility for him if he is convicted.

On Monday, Kim N. Shevchenko, the Russian consul at Sheremetyevo airport, said
that Mr. Snowden's traveling companion had hand-delivered an asylum request to
the consular office in Terminal F of the airport, and that it had been passed on
to the Foreign Ministry.

The request had threatened to deeply complicate Russia's position in Mr.
Snowden's case, potentially making it impossible to maintain the mostly neutral
position that Mr. Putin has sought to stake out since Mr. Snowden landed in
Moscow.

The Russian Constitution gives the president direct authority over asylum
requests.

At his news conference on Monday, Mr. Putin tried to thread the needle, saying
Mr. Snowden was welcome to stay in Russia as long as he stopped publishing
classified documents that hurt the United States' interests. He went on to
acknowledge that this was unlikely to happen.

Mr. Putin's comments reflected an increasingly sober view of the outcome if Mr.
Snowden remains in Russia. For the second time, he took pains to say that Mr.
Snowden had not been recruited by Russian intelligence - an impression that
could corrode Mr. Snowden's image as a truth-teller and drive away some
supporters.

''He sees himself not as a former agent of a special service but as a fighter
for human rights, a sort of a new dissident, someone similar to Sakharov, on a
different scale, though,'' Mr. Putin said. ''But nevertheless, at his core he is
a fighter for human rights, for democracy.'' The reference was to the Soviet
dissident Andrei D. Sakharov.

While Mr. Snowden remains at Sheremetyevo, the United States has engaged an
array of countries that have considered granting him asylum, making clear that
doing so would carry big costs.

Ecuador, the country that is sheltering the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange,
has distanced itself. Top officials said that they could not consider Mr.
Snowden's asylum request unless he was in Ecuador or one of its embassies, and
that Russia bore most responsibility for his fate.

Mr. Putin's spokesman said as recently as Sunday that Mr. Snowden's case ''was
not one on the Kremlin's agenda,'' noting that Sheremetyevo's transit zone is
legally not the part of territory of the Russian Federation.

''Snowden himself is in a pretty difficult situation,'' said Dmitri V. Trenin,
director of the Carnegie Moscow Center. ''I think he was following Assange's
advice trying to get to Ecuador, but then Ecuador, and, indirectly, Cuba, have
failed him. I think Venezuela is talking to the U.S. as well. The U.S. can offer
things to Venezuela.''

Mr. Snowden's application for asylum could make it difficult for the Kremlin to
remain neutral, especially since the case has become a primary topic for public
discussion in Russia over the last several days.

A parade of public figures - including human rights activists, pro-Kremlin
figures, Communists, nationalists and parliamentarians - have made statements in
favor of granting him asylum. As anchors read reports on Mr. Snowden's case on a
popular news program Monday night, a vivid blue-and-red backdrop read ''Betray
Snowden - Betray Freedom'' and showed President Barack Obama wearing headphones,
a visual reference to the surveillance programs Mr. Snowden has revealed.

''To be honest, I can't see any problem there,'' Ivan Melnikov, one of the
leaders of Russia's Communist Party, told Interfax. ''If the problem is
hysterics from the United States, they ought to remember that, historically
speaking, granting political asylum to figures like Snowden is normal historical
practice, and there's no reason for Russia to be embarrassed and drop out.''

At a round table on Monday, a prominent leader of United Russia, the main
pro-Kremlin party, said Mr. Snowden ''has done no less to win the Nobel Prize
than Barack Obama.'' Kirill Kabanov, a member of the presidential human rights
council, described Mr. Snowden as a man who ''tried to save the world.''

Sergei A. Markov, a pro-Kremlin analyst, said that if Mr. Snowden received
asylum, he could acquire a Russian transit document and leave the country, or
else remain in the country as a public figure, which he said would be ''very
good for public relations, he will be like Gérard Depardieu.'' Mr. Depardieu,
the French actor, sought Russian citizenship to avoid taxes in his home country.

Mr. Markov said Russian leaders had spent several days weighing their options
and taking a measure of domestic public opinion. The result, he said, was ''more
or less consensus over this issue.''

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              251 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden left in legal limbo as options shrink;
Fugitive accuses American administration of denying him  basic right  to seek
asylum

SECTION: IRELAND; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 606 words


MARY FITZGERALDForeign Affairs Correspondent

US whistleblower Edward Snowden remains in legal limbo in a Moscow airport after
his hopes of escaping prosecution began to fade yesterday, following
unsuccessful attempts to seek political asylum in several countries including
Ireland.

Mr Snowden, a former contractor for the CIA and the US National Security Agency,
is on the run after disclosing details of extensive electronic surveillance
programmes. The revelations include alleged American spying in Europe and on EU
institutions in the US. Mr Snowden fled from Hong Kong to Moscow on June 23rd.

According to WikiLeaks, Mr Snowden has sought political asylum from 21
countries, passing his requests to Russian officials from Sheremetyevo airport,
where he has been holed up without valid travel documents after the US revoked
his passport.

He cancelled an earlier asylum request to Russia after president Vladimir Putin
said the fugitive whistleblower would only be welcomed there if he stopped "his
work aimed at bringing harm" to the US.

The Irish embassy in Moscow received the written request for asylum yesterday
morning. The contents of that letter have not been made public but in a similar
document Mr Snowden sent to the Polish embassy, he outlined his fears of what
might happen to him if he was forced to return to the US.

"It is unlikely that I would receive a fair trial or proper treatment prior to
trial, and face the possibility of life in prison or even death," he wrote.

Mr Snowden's options appear to be shrinking as several of the countries to which
he sent asylum requests either rejected them or said they could only consider an
application if it was made on their soil. Ireland was one of nearly a dozen
countries that responded by saying Snowden would have to apply from within the
jurisdiction.

Taoiseach Enda Kenny told the DÃ¡il yesterday that if a valid application was
made by Mr Snowden it would be dealt with by Irish authorities in accordance
with the relevant legislation.

In a statement published by WikiLeaks, Mr Snowden accused the Obama
administration of "using citizenship as weapon" and pressuring countries where
he has applied for asylum. The US has warned states against granting him refuge,
saying such a move would be costly.

"Without any judicial order, the administration now seeks to stop me exercising
a basic right. A right that belongs to everybody. The right to seek asylum," Mr
Snowden said. "Their purpose is to frighten not me, but those who would come
after me."

WikiLeaks spokesman Kristinn Hrafnsson said Mr Snowden had been rendered
stateless by the revoking of his passport. "This is politically motivated
persecution and therefore a case for political asylum by any standards," he told
The Irish Times. "In an ideal world Mr Snowden should be granted asylum in any
European state."

The only country that has indicated an interest in taking in the whistleblower
is Venezuela. "He deserves the world's protection," Venezuelan president Nicolas
Maduro said during a visit to Moscow.

Maduro told reporters yesterday that Mr Snowden was a person who had "spoken a
great truth about how the capitalist elite of the United States tries to control
the world, spy on its friends and enemies, spy on the whole world".

However, asked whether he would be taking Mr Snowden home with him, Maduro
replied: "What we will take away with us is multiple deals signed with Russia,
particularly in the oil and gas field."

Meanwhile, Mr Snowden's father wrote an open letter, released yesterday, in
which he praised his son for "summoning the American people to confront the
growing danger of tyranny".

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              252 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Snowden pulls back from Russia;
Putin's conditions for asylum, halting the release of U.S. secrets, may be
unacceptable for the NSA leaker.

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


With his prospects for refuge narrowing, Edward Snowden withdrew an application
for asylum in Russia, apparently deciding that he couldn't abide by President
Vladimir Putin's insistence that he stop leaking U.S. secrets, a Kremlin
spokesman said Tuesday.

"True, Snowden did voice a request to stay in Russia," presidential spokesman
Dmitry Peskov told reporters. "At the same time, having found out yesterday
about Russia's position outlined by President Putin ... he rejected his
intention and his request to get a chance to stay in Russia."

Putin had said Monday that the former U.S. National Security Agency contractor
must stop activities "aimed at damaging our American partners" if he wanted to
be granted asylum in Russia.

"As far as we know he is not going to give those up," Peskov said of Snowden.

Putin had also said that, regardless of Snowden's application, Russia would not
turn him over to U.S. authorities for prosecution.

The WikiLeaks organization, which is helping Snowden, said Tuesday that the
fugitive has applied for asylum in 20 other countries, but many of them appear
to be unlikely refuges and several announced that they would not accept him. The
countries listed by WikiLeaks were: Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, China, Cuba,
Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, India, Italy, Ireland, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela.

Most of those countries have extradition agreements with the U.S., which has
issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest.

On Tuesday, a plane carrying Bolivian President Evo Morales home from a summit
of major gas exporters at the Kremlin was rerouted to Austria after France and
Portugal refused to let it cross their airspace because of suspicion that
Snowden was aboard, Bolivia's foreign minister told the Associated Press.

Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca denied that Snowden was on the plane, which
landed in Vienna. Austrian Foreign Ministry spokesman Alexander Schallenberg
told the AP that Snowden is not with Morales and that the Bolivian president was
spending the night at a Vienna hotel.

"We don't know who invented this lie. We want to denounce to the international
community this injustice with the plane of President Evo Morales," Choquehuanca
was quoted as saying from Vienna.

Morales had said in an interview with Russia Today television that Bolivia would
be willing to consider granting asylum to Snowden.

Among the other remaining possibilities was Venezuela, whose president, Nicolas
Maduro, was also at the Moscow summit.

Maduro told reporters that he was unaware of Snowden's asylum application and
intended to return home with "numerous agreements related to investments in the
oil and gas sphere" -- but apparently not with Snowden. Maduro, a persistent
critic of the U.S. who has inherited the mantle of the late President Hugo
Chavez, did praise Snowden for telling "the big truth to prevent wars."

Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski posted a message on Twitter that he would
not grant the request. Brazil, Germany and India were among other countries that
said they would not accept Snowden.

Leonid Kalashnikov, deputy head of the foreign relations committee of the lower
house of Russia's parliament, said that Putin doesn't want to quarrel with the
United States over Snowden.

"The way the Kremlin presents it, Putin wants to save face before the nations by
not bowing to the United States. But at the same time, he doesn't want to
sacrifice what positive aspects still remain in U.S.-Russian relations over the
fugitive," Kalashnikov said.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

The Associated Press was used in compiling this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              253 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

Fugitive whistleblower sends asylum pleas across the globe

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 418 words


United States fugitive Edward Snowden has abandoned his request for political
asylum in Russia after Moscow told him he would have to stop leaking US
intelligence reports, a Kremlin spokesman said last night.

"He abandoned his intention and his request to receive the chance of staying in
Russia," Russian President Vladimir Putin"s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, told
reporters.

Snowden applied for asylum on Monday and yesterday Putin said he was welcome to
stay in Russia as long as he stopped his leaks.

WikiLeaks said yesterday that Snowden had submitted asylum requests to 19
nations in addition to earlier requests to Ecuador and Iceland. WikiLeaks said
its legal adviser in the Snowden matter, Sarah Harrison, had personally
submitted other requests on behalf of Snowden, the National Security Agency
(NSA) whistleblower.

"The requests were delivered to an official at the Russian consulate at
Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow," a WikiLeaks statement said.

"The documents outline the risks of persecution Snowden faces in the US and have
started to be delivered by the Russian consulate to the relevant embassies in
Moscow."

The petitions on Snowden"s behalf were made to Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, China,
Cuba, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, Poland, Russia, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela, the group added.
Poland"s Foreign Minister said the country would not grant asylum to Snowden.

Last night Venezuelan President NicolasMaduro said: "He [Snowdon] deserves the
world"s protection. He has not asked us for it yet. When he does we will give
our answer."

Snowden yesterday accused US President Barack Obama of "pressuring the leaders"
of countries from which he has sought protection. In his first public
announcement since fleeing Hong Kong eight days ago, Snowden said Obama of
having ordered Vice-President Joe Biden to put pressure on leaders of countries
where he was seeking asylum.

It also emerged that Snowden had written to Ecuador"s President Rafael Correa
thanking him for his support in his bid to avoid extradition. "There are few
world leaders who would risk standing for the human rights of an individual
against the most powerful government on earth, and the bravery of Ecuador and
its people is an example to the world," he wrote.

The Independent reported that relations between Ecuador and WikiLeaks" Julian
Assange, who claimed asylum in the country"s west London embassy more than a
year ago, were becoming "incredibly strained".

- AFP, Independent

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              254 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Snowden abandons asylum bid;
Stranded - Whistleblower rejects Russian demands - Russia

BYLINE: Paul McGeough, Chief Correspondent Washington

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 504 words


Notwithstanding broad popular and political support in Moscow for granting
asylum to Edward Snowden, the self-admitted leaker of Washington's most closely
held global espionage secrets, Russian President Vladimir Putin appears to have
ruled it out.

Mr Snowden withdrew his Russian asylum request because of a demand that he stop
harming US interests by leaking documents, as countries from Latin America to
Europe brushed off his bid for refuge, Bloomberg reported.

"Theoretically, Snowden could stay in the Russian Federation, but with one
condition - that he give up his intention to carry out anti-American actions,"
Mr Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov said. "As far as we know, he refuses to do
so."

Purportedly still "marooned" in the transit lounge at Sheremetyevo International
Airport, Mr Snowden had made a formal application for asylum on Sunday.

Russian officials claimed not to know where he was staying - "she didn't say and
I didn't ask," an airport consular official said after receiving the asylum
application from Mr Snowden's WikiLeaks handler, Sarah Harrison.

Of the 20 nations in which Mr Snowden had sought asylum, only Norway has so far
confirmed reception of an application.

Norwegian foreign ministry spokesman Frode Andersen said: "It is probably from
him and it is allegedly signed by him, but we have no way of checking that."

Mr Snowden is in his second week at the airport, though there has been no
confirmed sighting of him and his options seem to be narrowing. Ecuador's
enthusiasm for his case is fading rapidly and Mr Putin appears to be bent on
playing with American sensitivities, but not obliging Mr Snowden at the same
time.

Amid such uncertainty, the cocksureness that was a hallmark of Mr Snowden's
early comments is fading too. A statement issued in his name by WikiLeaks on
Monday was marked by crankiness and a sense of disbelief that the US would play
hardball in its efforts to have him handed over.

The statement, posted on the WikiLeaks website, denounced President Barack Obama
for reducing Mr Snowden to a "stateless person" by revoking his passport and
took Vice-President Joe Biden to task for pressuring governments not to take Mr
Snowden.

"The Obama administration has now adopted a strategy of using citizenship as a
weapon - although I'm convicted of nothing, it has unilaterally revoked my
passport, leaving me a stateless person."

In filing for asylum in Russia and Norway, Mr Snowden also gave local officials
a list of 17 other countries in which he would wish to request asylum: Austria,
Bolivia, Brazil, China, Cuba, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Ireland,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Poland, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela.

Mr Putin, himself a stranger to human rights as most would like to see them
practised, spoke as if he were the patron saint of activism. "Considering that [
Snowden] considers himself a human rights activist and a fighter for human
rights, he probably doesn't plan to stop this work, so he should choose a host
country and head there," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2013 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              255 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       July 3, 2013 Wednesday 8:40 PM GMT

Edward Snowden: there will be more 'Libertarian Millennials' like him;
Diplomatic rows and farcical airport spats over the fate of the NSA
whistleblower are obscuring his real political significance, says Bonnie Greer

BYLINE: By Bonnie Greer

LENGTH: 1270 words


We arrived yesterday at an absurd moment in the saga of the American
whistleblower Edward Snowden. The presidential plane carrying Bolivia's Evo
Morales home from a conference in Moscow was searched during a stop-over in
Vienna on suspicion of carrying Snowden to 0asylum in Latin America. The
Bolivians declared that France, Italy, Spain and Portugal had refused to allow
the plane to enter their airspace, forcing it to land in Austria.

Bolivia, no friend of the US, accused European countries of doing the US's dirty
work. "We have no doubt that it was an order from the White House," Sacha
Llorenti, the country's ambassador to the UN, said. "By no means should a
diplomatic plane with the president be diverted from its route and forced to
land in another country."

France, Spain and Portugal subsequently denied that they had closed their
airspace. Austria insisted that President Morales had agreed to a voluntary
inspection of his plane; Austria's deputy chancellor, Michael Spindelegger,
said: "Our colleagues from the airport had a look and can give assurances that
no one is on board who is not a Bolivian citizen." Eventually, amid talk from
the Bolivians of an act of aggression and a violation of international law, the
plane was allowed to take off.

About 21 countries have become involved in Snowden's request for asylum. Five
have rejected granting Snowden asylum, seven have said they would consider a
request if made on their soil, and eight said they had either not made a
decision or not received a request. President Obama warned that any offer of
asylum to Snowden would carry a heavy cost.

Meanwhile, Snowden is believed still to be in Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow.
Russia has no extradition treaty with the US; President Putin has stated that
there is a possibility that Snowden could stay, but that he must not leak
information "against our American partners". He ended this statement by saying
that "this may sound surprising coming from my lips".

If you look at the photograph of presidents Obama and Putin at the G8 last
month, seated together at a press conference almost with their backs to one
another, it would be easy to assume that Snowden would provide a perfect
opportunity for Putin to wreak mischief and mayhem. This affair has provided,
instead, another chapter in the Game of Nations. And there sits Snowden, in a
Moscow transit lounge, the lead character in what must have been, to him, an act
that was straightforward: he had a personal mission to complete.

To many, particularly those on the centre-Right, the Snowden revelations are
interesting in the particular, but no big thing in the general. Of course we are
spied on, listened to, observed, the argument runs: what's new? London has more
security cameras per mile than any city on earth. You are likely to be captured
up to 500 times a day if you live in the West End as I do. Our smart phones have
become big data collectors, and as long as we've done nothing wrong, we have
nothing to hide.

Snowden is, to those who feel that way, another Lefty on the run; not worth
thinking about other than as an amusement, a bit of a divertissement in the
daily news bulletins.

Then there are those who argue that, while the US government should prosecute
Snowden, the media's focus on his personal life, his whereabouts, what he is
about to do next, draws attention away from more important issues: serious
questions about US government surveillance and how the Patriot Act and the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act are interpreted.

But they're wrong. Something new is revealing itself in the tale of Edward
Snowden and it is coming quickly into the general consciousness. Snowden is part
of the global town square, created by social media, which is effectively running
politics in Brazil, Egypt, Turkey, and will do so in the West, too.

Snowden, who spent his 30th birthday on the run, is one of a new breed I call
the "Libertarian Millennial". Apolitical, perhaps even post-political, they do
what they do because they have come to their own conclusions in their own time
and in their own way. "I don't want to live in a society that does these
[surveillance] sort of things... I do not want to live in a world where
everything I do and say is recorded," Snowden declares. There you have it: "I
don't", "I do not" and "everything I do and say" are the key phrases here.

Snowden is not like the main whistleblower of my youth, Daniel Ellsberg, who in
1971 leaked what became known as the Pentagon Papers, a defence department
history of American involvement in Vietnam. Ellsberg was steeped in the security
mechanisms of the United States; he knew what the consequences of his leak were.
He was a professional who saw what he did as part of what we, the young, were
doing in the streets. He pondered long and hard over his actions and, in doing
what he did, saw himself as part of something bigger, something collective.

In a sense, he took his permission from those of us who were against the Vietnam
War. Ellsberg came back to us as the vehicles who would take his action forward.
The press were largely on his side. They knew him, not necessarily in the
particular, but where he came from. They understood his intentions. He was not
alone.

At the trial of Bradley Manning, the US soldier accused of passing classified
material to the WikiLeaks website, attorneys are arguing over what the
prosecution calls Manning's "arrogance" and the defence call his "good
intentions". But Manning's actions fit neither of those definitions, as we
usually understand them. He and Snowden and other Millennials are empowered by
the tools that they are also at war with; it is these tools that are their
engines, the shapers of their consciousness. They are neither of the Left nor
the Right.

It is no surprise that Snowden contributed to the 2012 presidential campaign of
Ron Paul, who supports curtailing the powers of government. In his maverick
stance, and that of his son, Senator Rand Paul, the young find a model for
taking on the system as a personal quest. Snowden becomes, in his fight, what
Millennials look up to: a charismatic individual, who by sheer power of
self-belief can create support, even a movement.

The darker version of these charismatic individuals are the lone wolves who
commit their acts of terror in plain view.

In Boston, the hijacking of a car and the revelation of his crime to its
passenger was not simply a mistake or youthful stupidity on the part of the
alleged bomber who survived. Tweeting his whereabouts, his thoughts, his
feelings was apparently necessary to what he set out to do. Tweeting completed
the act. In Woolwich, the alleged killers of Drummer Shipley remained at the
scene seemingly in order to be filmed for YouTube.

In the world of the Libertarian Millennial, the act is not complete without
social media, without the bringing together of the crowd as receptor of their
personal feelings, their manifesto. And since it is embedded technology - which
we wear on our bodies or will even have implanted inside our bodies - that is
our future, more and more LMs will emerge, both as lone wolves - individuals out
to do maximum physical harm and wreak mayhem in the name of a religion or a
political ideology; or as charismatic individuals, people doing what they think
is right, and through that effort, rallying people and movements around them.

Snowden has been quoted as having written: "The consent of the governed is not
consent if it is not informed." And that "the truth is coming, and it cannot be
stopped." His breed of Libertarian Millennial is coming, too. It is they who
cannot be stopped.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              257 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 thetimes.co.uk

                       July 3, 2013 Wednesday 8:30 AM GMT

Edward Snowden's options narrow as countries rule out asylum

BYLINE: Ben Hoyle, Moscow Correspondent

SECTION: EUROPE

LENGTH: 439 words


Edward Snowden's hopes of escaping his hiding place in the transit zone of a
Moscow airport shrank yesterday when more than half the countries he had asked
for asylum turned down his application.

Only one of the 21 countries that the fugitive National Security Agency
contractor is understood to have written to in the past few days offered any
encouragement: Venezuela.

Bolivia, which had earlier appeared to hold out hope, said that Mr Snowden had
not accompanied President Morales when his aircraft left Moscow last night and
was forced to make an unscheduled stop in Austria.

Mr Morales had earlier said that his country "would be willing to debate and
consider the idea" of sheltering Mr Snowden.

There were rejections from Brazil, India, Finland and Poland. Austria, Ecuador,
Norway, Iceland, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Ireland and Spain said asylum
applications could only be considered from people already on their territory.
This would appear to rule out Mr Snowden, who is entering his 11th day stranded
inside Sheremetyevo airport without a valid passport or a Russian visa.

He has withdrawn his request for sanctuary in Russia, according to President
Putin's spokesman. Dmitry Peskov said that Mr Snowden did not want to be bound
by Mr Putin's condition that he stop his work aimed at "harming our American
partners".

On Monday WikiLeaks, the whistleblowing website that is helping Mr Snowden in
his attempt to stay out of reach of the American courts, posted online one of
the application letters allegedly written by Mr Snowden. Giving a glimpse of his
increasingly restricted options, he wrote: "The Obama administration has now
adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon ... although I am
convicted of nothing, it has unilaterally revoked my passport, leaving me a
stateless person."

According to WikiLeaks, the asylum requests were delivered by Sarah Harrison, a
WikiLeaks member of staff who is travelling with him, to the Russian duty consul
at Sheremetyevo airport.

President Correa of Ecuador said that trying to help Mr Snowden earlier in his
journey was a mistake and that his country would not consider the request until
Mr Snowden arrived there.

With China, Cuba and France among seven countries still to respond, Mr Snowden's
likeliest options appear to be Venezuela and Bolivia. Both of their presidents
were in Moscow yesterday to meet President Putin.

President Maduro told Russian reporters that Venezuela had not received an
application from Mr Snowden, but defended his right to leak information about
the scale of US covert surveillance of American and international citizens and
governments.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTTO


                     Copyright 2013 News International Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              258 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Attorney for Snowden's father says WikiLeaks won't let him talk to his son

BYLINE: Jerry Markon

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 696 words


The relationship between Edward Snowden's family and WikiLeaks turned
acrimonious Tuesday as an attorney for Snowden's father suggested that the
anti-secrecy organization is standing in the way of the father's efforts to
speak to his son, who is stranded in Russia.

Bruce Fein, an attorney for Lonnie Snowden, said WikiLeaks founder Julian
Assange called him Saturday and said Lonnie Snowden could talk to his son
through an "intermediary." WikiLeaks has been aiding Edward Snowden in his
flight from U.S. authorities, who have charged him with leaking classified
documents about government surveillance.

"We are obviously concerned. If Julian Assange can talk to Edward directly, why
can't his dad?" said Fein, who criticized what he called the "circus" of
Snowden's efforts to find asylum abroad, which WikiLeaks has apparently been
coordinating.

Fein's comments, the latest sign of tensions between Snowden's father and
Assange's group, came as Lonnie Snowden issued a broad defense of his son, a
former National Security Agency contractor who has admitted leaking information
about secret surveillance programs.

In an open letter released Tuesday, the elder Snowden, a retired U.S. Coast
Guard officer, praised his son as "a modern day Paul Revere summoning the
American people to confront the growing danger of tyranny and one branch
government."

"What you have done and are doing has awakened congressional oversight of the
intelligence community from deep slumber," said the letter, co-written with
Fein.

The U.S. government has condemned Snowden's actions and said the surveillance
programs he disclosed - in which the NSA collected massive amounts of Americans'
cellphone and Internet records - had been approved by Congress and were subject
to federal oversight.

Snowden has been stuck at an airport in Moscow since arriving from Hong Kong
late last month. WikiLeaks said he has sought asylum in 21 countries.

Assange has acted as a spokesman for the confessed leaker, and a top WikiLeaks
lieutenant accompanied Snowden to Moscow.

The anti-secrecy group and Snowden share similar experiences; the U.S.
government has also targeted WikiLeaks over its release of a massive cache of
sensitive diplomatic and military documents.

Snowden's father, however, has indicated that he does not welcome the group's
assistance to his son. In an interview on the "Today" show last week, Lonnie
Snowden expressed concern about WikiLeaks' influence on his son. Assange said
Sunday on ABC's "This Week" that "every father would be worried in this
situation" and vowed to "put some of his concerns to rest.''

That apparently has not happened. People close to Lonnie Snowden said Tuesday
that he remains suspicious of Assange's motives. And while WikiLeaks has been
aiding Snowden's flight, Fein last week wrote to the Justice Department and said
his client was confident Edward Snowden would turn himself in to U.S.
authorities under certain conditions.

A spokesman for WikiLeaks did not return calls or e-mails seeking comment
Tuesday.

Fein, a former Justice Department official in the Reagan administration who has
also been critical of U.S. surveillance policies, said Lonnie Snowden retained
him because of his opposition to the programs Edward Snowden exposed, his fears
for his son's safety and his concerns that he not be seen as "obstructing" the
criminal investigation.

Lonnie Snowden has been contacted by the Justice Department but is not
considered a target of the probe, according to people familiar with the
contacts, speaking on the condition of anonymity because the investigation is
ongoing.

"The purpose of engaging me wasn't simply to have his son come back," Fein said.
"It was also, 'What can we do to walk away from the precipice of a leviathan
state where nothing is private anymore and which operates in the kind of secrecy
we associated with China or Russia?'â[#x20ac][#x160]"

Fein was a senior policy adviser to the 2012 presidential campaign of Republican
Ron Paul, who has criticized what he views as excessive government intrusion
into Americans' lives. Edward Snowden made a $250 donation to that campaign,
records show.

jerry.markon@washpost.com

Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              259 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Leaker's options narrow as no safe harbor materializes

BYLINE: Kathy Lally;Juan Forero

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 1333 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - Bolivian President Evo Morales's plane, ferrying him home from Moscow,
was redirected to Vienna late Tuesday after France and Portugal refused to allow
it to enter their airspace because of the belief that the American fugitive
Edward Snowden was aboard, said Bolivian and Venezuelan authorities.

Snowden, who revealed secret U.S. surveillance programs and fled to Moscow to
stay beyond American reach, was not aboard the plane, an irate David
Choquehuanca, Bolivia's foreign minister, told reporters after the Bolivian
delegation landed in Vienna. "We don't know who invented this lie," he said from
Bolivia's capital, La Paz.

Choquehuanca said the plane was an hour from French airspace when it was told it
could not enter. "Portugal has to explain to us," he said. "France has to
explain to us why they canceled" flight authorization.

The allegation that the plane had been redirected for reasons related to Snowden
could not be verified.

The White House, CIA and State Department all declined to comment. But the
latest twist seemed to signal that U.S. authorities have been able to marshal
support from European countries in what has been a feverish pursuit of the
former National Security Agency contractor. It also underscored how Snowden has
settled still deeper into isolation as one country after another has rejected
his appeals for asylum since his disclosure of a trove of highly secret
documents.

But the diverting of Morales's plane is sure to fan anger against the United
States, which is trying to play down new revelations of spying against European
allies while trying to win support to corral Snowden even from countries such as
Russia, Bolivia and Venezuela, which are sharply at odds with the Obama
administration.

Venezuelan Foreign Minister Elias Jaua called the incident over Austria "an
attempt on Evo Morales's life." He said it was a sign of how far "the empire" -
a reference to the United States - and its "lackeys" would go "to hunt down a
young man who has only said the truth."

Bolivia's defense minister, Ruben Saavedra, who was on the flight, also blamed
the United States, telling Bolivian media that "this proves with clarity an
attitude of sabotage and plotting by the United States, pressuring European
government." He said that Italy, too, had barred Morales's plane from its
airspace.

For the United States, Bolivia clearly emerged as a possible sanctuary for
Snowden, who was stuck in Russia after the United States revoked his passport
before his arrival here on a flight from Hong Kong on June 23.

In an interview earlier Tuesday in Moscow on the state-financed RT news channel,
Morales said he would consider asylum for Snowden. "Yes, why not?" he said.
"Bolivia is there to welcome personalities who denounce - I don't know if it's
espionage or control. But we are here."

After living unseen in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo International
Airport for a week, Snowden sent out a 19 asylum requests Sunday night,
according to WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy organization that has been advising
him. On Monday, Russia's President Vladimir Putin said he could stay here if he
stopped leaking information harmful to the United States, an odd offer that
Snowden refused, a presidential spokesman said Tuesday morning.

That left a list of countries, from Austria to Venezuela, to which Snowden had
sent appeals. By Tuesday evening, at least eight of them - including Ecuador and
Iceland, which had been asked earlier - had said an applicant must be in the
country to be considered. At least three had said no, and others had not
replied.

Some countries avoided him out of friendship with the United States, others for
political or economic reasons. Ecuador, which at first had appeared
enthusiastic, grew less so after Vice President Biden made a call to the
president. To be granted asylum, Snowden would have to count on a country to
defy the United States. Of those on his list, Bolivia and Venezuela were looking
like the best possibilities. Both are hostile to the United States, and the
presidents of both countries have heaped praise on Snowden.

Morales, who said his government had not received a formal request for asylum,
in 2008 expelled the U.S. ambassador from his country and ended anti-drug
cooperation with Washington.

"Bolivia, as well as Venezuela and Ecuador," he said, "are exposed to constant
surveillance from the U.S. empire."

Venezuela's president, NicolÃ¡s Maduro, was also in Moscow, which had convened a
meeting of gas-exporting countries, and Russian media speculated that he would
take Snowden to Venezuela on his official plane.

Maduro smiled at that suggestion. "We will take with us numerous agreements on
investments in the oil and gas sector," he said. He defended the 30-year-old
former National Security Agency contractor, however, saying that he had neither
killed anyone nor planted a bomb and that he deserved protection. "He only told
the world a large truth to prevent war," Maduro said. "The U.S. capitalist elite
are trying to control the world and are spying on friends, foes and the entire
planet."

The Obama administration on Tuesday acknowledged contacting foreign governments
on Snowden's asylum list, but a State Department spokeswoman dismissed the
leaker's claims that Washington has mounted a campaign to pressure anyone
against offering him sanctuary.

"We have been in touch, as we have been for several days now, with a broad range
of countries that could serve as either transit spots or final destinations,"
said the spokeswoman, Jennifer Psaki. "And what we've been communicating is, of
course, what we've been communicating publicly - that Mr. Snowden has been
accused of leaking classified information. He is somebody that we would like to
see returned to the United States."

Late Tuesday, Maduro was preparing to fly on to Belarus - without Snowden, a
member of his entourage told the Interfax news agency. Nothing could be done,
the official told Interfax - the Venezuelan plane was at a different airport.

After his nine days in limbo, Snowden's situation looked desperate. Officials
here have portrayed themselves as powerless in the case because Snowden is
outside their jurisdiction in the transit zone and needs a passport or other
document before he can travel onward, but some Russians find that disingenuous.
Russian officials always find a way to do exactly what they want, they say.

And that has raised questions about what is going on behind the scenes. Pavel
Felgenhauer, a longtime military analyst and observer of the KGB's successor,
the Federal Security Service, or FSB, offered this speculative scenario: Russia
must be trying to see whether it can recruit Snowden.

In an interview Tuesday, Felgenhauer said that when Putin told reporters that
Snowden could stay if he stopped talking about the United States, Putin was
saying that Snowden had to make a choice. Putin was telling Snowden that he
would be working for Russia, not for one of the newspapers publishing his leaks,
Felgenhauer said.

The reason Snowden has not been seen is that border guards, who stand at the
door when an international flight lands and who work for the FSB, would have
hustled him off to a safe room in the airport, or even a safe house elsewhere,
Felgenhauer said. Snowden probably did not use a ticket he had to Havana on June
24, the analyst said, because his minders told him the United States would force
the Aeroflot flight down when it flew over U.S. territory.

"He's cornered psychologically," Felgenhauer said. "You bring the guy to the
breaking point to see if he's real. By now he's probably afraid of everything,
convinced he'll be hunted down like bin Laden if he leaves here."

As Felgenhauer put it in a Novaya Gazeta article this week, "Snowden remained in
Sheremetyevo like a suitcase with a broken-off handle: a pain to carry and a
shame to throw away."

kathy.lally@washpost.com

foreroj@washpost.com

Forero reported from Bogota, Colombia. Joby Warrick in Washington contributed to
this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              260 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Putin's spokesman explains Snowden's decision not to seek asylum in Russia

LENGTH: 337 words


Former employee of US special services Edward Snowden has indeed asked to be
allowed to stay in Russia, but when he learned about the terms put forward by
Moscow, he gave up his request, presidential press secretary Dmitriy Peskov said
on 2 July, privately-owned Russian news agency Interfax reported on the same
day.

"True, Snowden did request that he be allowed to stay in Russia. At the same
time, having learned on 1 July about Russia's position voiced by President
Vladimir Putin regarding the condition for him to be theoretically able to do
this, Snowden gave up his intention and request to receive opportunity to stay
in Russia," Peskov said.

On 1 July, Putin said that Snowden could stay in Russia if he stopped his
activities against the USA.

"At present, Snowden does not want to stay in Russia," Peskov added.

Snowden is in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport and did not
cross the Russian border, Peskov said. He added that Russian special services
"have never worked with Snowden, he is not their agent and is not working now".

In a separate report on 2 July, privately-owned Russian news agency Interfax
quoted Peskov as saying that Snowden "sent requests for political asylum to 15
countries".

At the same time, Peskov said that extraditing Snowden to the USA, where the
death penalty is used, was impossible.

"Snowden, due to sincere belief or for some other reason, considers himself a
human rights campaigner, a fighter for democracy and freedom. This is
acknowledged by Russian human rights activists and organizations as well as by
their colleagues abroad. In connection with this, extradition by anyone of
Snowden to a country like the USA, where the death penalty is used, is
impossible," Peskov said.

"Russia has never extradited anyone, does not extradite and will not extradite.
Such cases, that have taken place before, were linked with exchanges," Peskov
added.

Sources: Interfax news agency, Moscow, in Russian 0800 gmt 2 Jul 13; RIA Novosti
news agency, Moscow, in Russian 0813 gmt 2 Jul 13

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              261 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Russian TV and radio highlights for 24-30 June 2013

LENGTH: 1904 words


The fate of former American intelligence contractor Edward Snowden, wanted in
the United States for leaking government secrets, was the central theme of
Russian broadcast media news coverage in the week 24-30 June.

The 50th birthday of dissident and former oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovskiy, who
has been in prison since 2003, was also widely covered on Russian television and
radio, with some programmes suggesting that the authorities are preparing new
charges against him and his former business partner Platon Lebedev.

SNOWDEN

Weekly news magazines broadcast on 30 June on Russia's three most popular
channels - official state channel Rossiya 1, state-controlled Channel One and
Gazprom Media-owned NTV - all led with the story of fugitive US intelligence
leaker Edward Snowden. Rossiya 1 devoted more than 20 minutes of its "Vesti
Nedeli" flagship current affairs programme to reports related, in one way or
another, to Snowden, who has reportedly been staying in the transit zone of
Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport since arriving there from Hong Kong on 23 June.

Although reports listing Russia among the countries to have received Snowden's
asylum request did not appear until later, news programmes featured calls for
the Kremlin to give him "support". Claims of US duplicity in the Snowden case
and general anti-American rhetoric were in abundance, especially on Rossiya 1
and Moscow government-controlled Centre TV.

Snowden needs Russian "support"

Many of the calls for Snowden to be granted asylum came from members of the
Russian presidential council for human rights, whom some TV channels described
as "human rights defenders".

"He has done a very useful thing for society by supplying this information.
People have a right to information. In that respect, we should certainly support
him," the council's chairman, Mikhail Fedotov, said in remarks broadcast on
privately-owned REN TV's "Nedelya" programme.

Another council member, Kirill Kabanov, said on Rossiya 1's "Vesti Nedeli" that
Russia would not be able to send Snowden to the United States because he could
be executed there.

Speaking over a still of a US death-row prisoner and footage of an execution
chamber, "Vesti Nedeli" presenter Dmitriy Kiselev also suggested that Snowden,
whom he portrayed as an idealist ready for "self-sacrifice" in defence of his
beliefs, was likely to face the death penalty if extradited. Even if he were
not, he would not be safe, as the US authorities routinely kill their opponents
around the world, Kiselev claimed. "The New York Times wrote about the kill
lists which Obama signs every month," he said, while failing to mention that the
alleged lists, according to the article to which he was referring, consisted of
terror suspects, rather than whistle-blowers.

Calls for US to be challenged

"Vesti Nedeli" broadcast remarks by a retired Soviet intelligence general, who
said that Snowden should be given succour for political reasons. Nikolay Leonov,
captioned as the former head of a KGB analytical directorate, criticized
President Boris Yeltsin's administration for sending ousted East German
Communist leader Erich Honecker back to Germany in 1992. "We, Russians, are
still suffering from the fact that in the past we turned Honecker over. In the
consciousness of every normal Russian citizen, this remains a stain of shame,"
Leonov said.

Centre TV's "Postscript" weekly current affairs programme, which is presented by
State Duma International Relations Committee Chairman Aleksey Pushkov, was
equally critical of the United States. "The United States always supports
dissidents in other countries, but as far as its own dissidents who speak the
truth about American democracy are concerned, it immediately declares them
enemies of the state," Pushkov said, adding that Washington was "baying for
Snowden's blood".

The programme featured remarks by Veronika Krasheninnikova, captioned as
director-general of the Institute for External Political Studies and
Initiatives, who suggested that Russia would benefit from openly defying the
United States. "When America pats you on the back and holds you up as an example
of democracy, it means that your country is capitulating. In other words, we
should not fear a deterioration in relations with the United States. The United
States will not allow them to deteriorate beyond a certain point because they
currently need Russia more than we need the United States," Krasheninnikova
said.

Centre TV also praised China, which "showed character" by rebuffing the United
States in an editorial in the Communist Party newspaper Renmin Ribao, a brief
excerpt from which was quoted.

Snowden urged to seek Russian asylum

Russian television and radio programmes featured remarks by various pundits and
public figures suggesting that Snowden's request for political asylum in Russia
would be treated sympathetically. One of the clearest indications that such an
application was likely to be upheld came from pro-Kremlin journalist Maksim
Shevchenko, who is also a member of the presidential council for human rights.

"Tell Snowden that I am asking him to apply for political asylum in Russia and
will be in favour of such asylum being granted," he said in an interview in the
"Special Opinion" programme on Gazprom-owned, editorially independent Ekho
Moskvy radio on 27 June.

"The American state treats Russia like some kind of semi-colony or American
protectorate. I believe that [Russian President Vladimir] Putin is doing his
utmost to help Russia emerge from this strange state. It simply has to do it,
and Snowden would be a good precedent," Shevchenko said. He added that "rescuing
and supporting" Snowden would be "a strong move in relations with the United
States" and "a demonstration of the political will, independence and sovereignty
of the Russian state".

Putin's handling of the Snowden case drew praise from Rossiya 1's "Vesti Nedeli"
and Centre TV's "Postscript". "Vesti Nedeli" presenter Dmitriy Kiselev referred
to Putin's initial comments, which he made on a visit to Finland on 25 June, as
"subtle", and portrayed the Russian president, who is a keen judoka, as an
astute fighter utilizing the might of the United States to Russia's advantage.
"In line with the rules of judo, he is using the force of the opponent against
the latter," Kiselev said.

Snowden's whereabouts unclear

Despite the official line that Snowden has been staying in the transit area of
Moscow's Sheremetyevo, state-controlled channels did not espouse this claim with
too much conviction.  "Vesti Nedeli" presenter Kiselev merely said that Snowden
was "currently in Moscow", without specifying exactly where.

Meanwhile, media outlets exercising a greater degree of editorial independence
openly questioned the assumption.

REN TV's "Nedelya" noted that passengers would normally be allowed to stay in
the transit areas at Russian ports of entry without a visa for a maximum of 24
hours, providing they have a ticket for their onward journey. It suggested that
Snowden did not meet these requirements. "The longer Snowden stays de facto in
Russia, the more suspicions there will be that he has come into contact with the
Russian authorities," REN TV said.

Similar points were made by speakers on Ekho Moskvy radio.

"I do not for a second believe the theory that he is wandering in the border
zone," pro-opposition journalist Sergey Parkhomenko said in his "Sut Sobytiy"
opinion slot on 28 June. "Of course, he was whisked out of Sheremetyevo a long
time ago and has since been at a safe place," he added.

Another journalist, Yevgeniya Albats, speculated that Snowden was being
debriefed by Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) officers. "Snowden must
be at some SVR dacha near Moscow where they are getting out of him whatever they
can, which, from the standpoint of a special service, is absolutely right,"
Albats said in the 25 June edition of "Special Opinion".

KHODORKOVSKIY

Two major Russian weekly television news programmes carried two very different
reports about Mikhail Khodorkovskiy, who turned 50 on 26 June.

REN TV's "Nedelya" broadcast a sympathetic report featuring interviews with the
parents of the jailed former Yukos oil company boss, which were accompanied by a
rather mournful piano soundtrack.

In contrast, Rossiya 1's "Vesti Nedeli" launched a scathing attack on
Khodorkovskiy and his former business partner Platon Lebedev, who has also been
in prison since 2003, linking them to contract killing of Vladimir Petukhov,
mayor of the Siberian oil town of Nefteyugansk, on 26 June 1998.

The report, which heaped praise on Petukhov, described the murder as a "birthday
present" to Khodorkovskiy, who turned 35 on the day it took place. Archive
footage was shown of Petukhov's supporters rallying in Nefteyugansk shortly
after he was shot and accusing Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev of being behind the
attack. "Vesti Nedeli" presenter Kiselev acknowledged that the timing of the
attack "may be just a coincidence", but his mischievous facial expression as he
spoke suggested he was in no doubt as to who was responsible. Earlier, one of
the women at the Nefteyugansk rally shouting "Khodorkovskiy killed him" was
shown in the headlines at the start of "Vesti Nedeli".

Similar allegations against Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev were carried in a
20-minute film shown on Gazprom Media-owned NTV on 24 June.

"Could Khodorkovskiy have been unaware of the plan to kill Petukhov? And why was
the mayor killed on the oligarch's birthday?" the voiceover asked. The answer
came from one of the contributors: "It can only have been a birthday present for
Khodorkovskiy." But this was as strong as the evidence got.

In the style of past NTV documentaries apparently produced to order, this one
also relied on association and implication, rather than hard fact. It featured a
sonorous voiceover and a haunting soundtrack. There was ample footage of
Khodorkovskiy and his associates in a variety of carefree and happy settings,
juxtaposed with stories of the hardship and horrors they allegedly inflicted on
Nefteyugansk.

New criminal case?

Neither the NTV film nor the report on Rossiya 1's "Vesti Nedeli" mentioned the
possibility of new charges being brought against Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev, who
are due to be released next year, although commentators on Ekho Moskvy radio saw
the ongoing smear campaign as a prelude to another prosecution.

In remarks broadcast on the "Grani Nedeli" programme on 29 June, the editor of
the heavyweight Russian daily Nezavisimaya Gazeta, Konstantin Remchukov, said
that "the media campaign unfolding in recent days appears to confirm rumours
that Khodorkovskiy may face charges that are more serious than tax evasion". "It
seems that the authorities do not want Khodorkovskiy out," Remchukov added.

Anti-Kremlin satirist and commentator Viktor Shenderovich said in Ekho Moskvy's
"Special Opinion" programme on 27 June that Khodorkovskiy would remain in prison
as long as Putin was in power. "One of them has to be behind bars. I think Putin
understands this perfectly well. Many people have noted Putin's personal hatred
of Khodorkovskiy and his irritation whenever the name Khodorkovskiy is
mentioned. Whenever this has happened, he has shown his true colours and started
shaking with rage. That is why I believe that, with Putin in power,
Khodorkovskiy will not be freed. I would really like to be proved wrong here,
but that is what I think," Shenderovich said.

Sources: as listed

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              263 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Mirror

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

RUNAWAY SNOWDEN SEEKS RUSSIA ASYLUM;
Whistleblower is 'desperate'

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER BUCKTIN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 471 words


CIA whistleblower Edward Snowden yesterday applied to Moscow for political
asylum - raising fears that diplomatic tensions between Russia and the US could
worsen.

The 30-year-old fugitive, who leaked highly classified details of secret US spy
software, handed Kremlin officials an appeal to 15 countries for political
asylum.

In a bizarre twist, his application for refuge came 50 years to the day after
top British intelligence officer Kim Philby defected to the then-Soviet Union.

Snowden has been in the transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo International
Airport since fleeing Hong Kong nine days ago.

WikiLeaks aide Sarah Harrison handed his application to the airport's consulate
department after Snowden's intended move to Ecuador faltered. The anti-secrecy
website has vowed to help him find political asylum.

But a Russian Foreign Ministry official said: "It was a desperate measure on his
part after Ecuador disavowed his political protection credentials." The official
also revealed: "In the document Snowden reiterated that he is not a traitor and
explained his actions only by a desire to open the world's eyes on the flagrant
violations by US special services - not only of American citizens but also
citizens of the European Union and their NATO allies."

He did not say which other countries were on the list, but it is thought to
include Venezuela and Iceland.

Snowden last week failed to board a plane to Ecuador, prompting US fears he was
providing secrets to Russia.

Talks over the weekend with the White House, left Ecuador's President Rafael
Correa reluctant to grant him asylum.

And it emerged yesterday that Russian President Vladimir Putin and US leader
Barack Obama have now ordered the heads of their security agencies, the FSB and
the FBI, to find a solution to the stalemate.

Mr Putin last week said he would not hand Snowden to the US. But yesterday,
although he told a news conference Russia "never hands over anybody anywhere" he
said "professionals" should decide Snowden's fate.

He said: "Snowden is free to go, but if he decides to stay, he has to stop his
work directed to hurt our American partners." The leader added: "I know that
this kind of statement sounds strange from me."

Meanwhile President Obama said Snowden had travelled to Russia without a valid
passport - and he hoped Moscow would handle the case as it would any other
travel-related matter.

He also confirmed America and Russia have had "high-level" discussions about
Snowden. But the US was last night in more diplomatic hot water as French
President Francois Hollande said allegations that spies from the States bugged
European embassies could threaten plans for a huge EU-US trade deal.

Double-agent Kim Philby was part of the infamous Cambridge Five spy ring.

He worked for the KGB after defecting to Russia and died in Moscow in 1988.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ORDERS President Putin
july 1, 2013 Snowden applies for political asylum in Moscow
july 1, 1963 Kim Philby flees to Moscow as he is unveiled as a double agent

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2013 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              265 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Comment: We can help Snowden: The NSA whistleblower has been offered asylum, but
he still needs citizens' support to achieve it

BYLINE: Mark Weisbrot

SECTION: GUARDIAN COMMENT AND DEBATE PAGES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 668 words


With Edward Snowden stuck in limbo in Moscow airport, many people in the United
States and around the world are wondering what can be done to help him. More
than 123,000 Americans have signed a petition on the White House website saying
that "Edward Snowden is a national hero and should be immediately issued a full,
free, and absolute pardon". Other petitions of support such as one on Avaaz.org
have gathered as many as 1.3m signatures.

Actually, there is quite a bit that can be done to help Snowden reach a safe
place where he can be free from persecution by the US government.

The governments of Ecuador, Russia, and Venezuela have invited Snowden to apply
for asylum, and there is little doubt that it would be granted. The legal basis
for political asylum is very strong, especially since the US has charged Snowden
under the espionage act. Since it is pretty clear that there was no espionage
involved here - there is no evidence that he collaborated or even met with any
foreign governments - this is one indicator that Snowden has a well-founded fear
of persecution. And politically, despite efforts by much of the media to brand
Snowden a criminal and a traitor, most of the world appears to sympathise with
him. Any government that helps him would have popular support at home.

The problem is that these governments are reluctant to take the necessary steps
to get Snowden freedom because of possible US retaliation. But retaliation is
not as likely as many think: Washington was angry with Hong Kong for about a day
after it rejected a request for extradition, and then it blew over. John Kerry's
warnings of "consequences" for Russia and China were reversed on Thursday by
President Obama, who sought to lower the profile of the issue.

And there are things that other governments could do to help this process along.
First and easiest, the governments of South America - perhaps through a regional
body such as Unasur - can denounce Washington's threats to cut off Ecuador's
trade preferences in retaliation for offering to receive Snowden's application
for asylum. They took similar steps in response to the UK's threats to invade
Ecuador's embassy in London to capture Julian Assange, and these moves were
politically successful.

Second, more governments can make statements in support of what Snowden did, as
politely as they prefer, and offer to receive an application for political
asylum - something they are required to do in any case under international law.
The more governments that make such statements, the more difficult it is for
Washington to isolate any one of them or retaliate against them.

Third, although Ecuador was reluctant to offer travel documents for Snowden,
other governments can. Again, the more governments that state their willingness
to do so, the less likely retaliation from the US becomes.

Then there is the question of how Snowden gets to a safe country. Any friendly
government could offer him a private plane. Prominent US citizens could offer to
accompany him, to reduce the chances of risky behaviour by the US military -
although Obama has said that he "was not going to scramble any jets" to get
Snowden. The Russian government, if it is unwilling to offer him a visa for its
own country, could provide transportation to another government embassy in
Moscow, where Snowden could apply for asylum. From there, the Russians would be
legally bound to offer Snowden safe passage to the country that had offered him
asylum.

Finally, the "second superpower" - global civil society - could act on its own.
Citizens could, for instance, form a "Snowden Aviation Club", to finance a
private plane to take him to a safe place.

Edward Snowden has performed a heroic service to the people of the US and the
world by exposing widespread government abuses that are a threat to freedom
everywhere. It's up to everyone who understands this to make sure he is not
persecuted for doing so.

Mark Weisbrot is co-director of the Centre for Economic and Policy Research in
Washington

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              266 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Covert surveillance: Putin: Snowden could stay in Russia - if he keeps quiet:
President's offer likely to anger Washington 'Trapped' whistleblower remains
unseen at airport

BYLINE: Miriam Elder in Moscow

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 751 words


Vladimir Putin has for the first time floated the idea that the US whistleblower
Edward Snowden may remain in Russia, hours after the fugitive applied for
political asylum in the country.

Snowden applied for asylum at the consular office at Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport at 10.30pm on Sunday through Sarah Harrison, his WikiLeaks handler, a
consular official said.

"The UK citizen Sarah Harrison passed on a request by Edward Snowden to be
granted political asylum," said Kim Shevchenko, a consular official. He said he
then called the foreign ministry, which sent a courier an hour later to pick up
the request. He declined to say where Harrison or Snowden, who have not been
seen since landing in Sheremetyevo last week, were staying. "She didn't say and
I didn't ask," he said.

In a move likely to enrage the US, Putin said yesterday: "If he wants to go
somewhere and someone will take him, go ahead. If he wants to stay here, there
is one condition - he must stop his work aimed at bringing harm to our American
partners, as strange as that sounds coming from my mouth."

Snowden has been trapped in Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport since 23 June after
flying in from Hong Kong, from where he leaked top secret documents detailing
NSA surveillance programmes. Stripped of his US passport, he has been in limbo
ever since. His attempts to gain political asylum in Ecuador, whose London
embassy is sheltering the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, appear to have
failed amid intense US lobbying and reported disagreements within the Ecuadorean
government.

Snowden met Russian diplomats yesterday and handed them a list of 15 countries
where he would like to apply for asylum, the Los Angeles Times reported, citing
a source in the foreign ministry.

Putin appeared to leave himself some latitude, noting that Snowden would be
unlikely to meet his conditions for staying in Russia. "Considering that he
considers himself a human rights activist and a fighter for human rights, he
probably doesn't plan to stop this work, so he should choose a host country and
head there," Putin said. "When this will happen I, unfortunately, do not know."

Speaking after a meeting of gas-exporting countries, Putin reiterated that
Russia would not extradite Snowden to the US. "Russia never gives anyone up and
doesn't plan to give anyone up. And no one has ever given us anyone."

For the second time, Putin, insisted unprompted that Snowden was not working
with Russia's secret services. "Mr Snowden is not our agent, never was and isn't
today. Our special services have never worked with him."

Russia maintains one of the world's most developed intelligence mechanisms and
is widely believed to snoop on its own citizens. In stark contrast to Russia's
approach to Snowden, whom Putin likened to the Soviet-era dissident Andrei
Sakharov, Russian whistleblowers are often attacked - one, the anti-corruption
activist Alexei Navalny, is on trial and the lawyer Sergei Magnitsky died in
prison.

Yet Assange remains a champion of the Kremlin. Last month, the WikiLeaks
founder, who had a television show on the Kremlin's English-language propaganda
channel Russia Today, said he had advised Snowden to seek asylum there.

Nicolas Maduro, Venezuela's president, is in Moscow for the two-day gas
conference and it was believed he and Putin would discuss Snowden's fate.
Putin's foreign policy adviser, Yury Ushakov, said the pair had not discussed
Snowden yet.

A campaign calling for Snowden to stay in Russia has gathered momentum since he
arrived in Moscow last week. Yesterday, several MPs floated the idea during a
meeting of the civic chamber, a body that advises the Kremlin.

"It's not right that Snowden is sitting in this terminal like in a prison," said
Sergei Markov, a former MP with close ties to the Kremlin. "Unlike prison, he
can't even go out and breathe fresh air. On humanitarian grounds, I think he
should be presented with a way to enter Russian territory."

Several MPs said they would nominate Snowden for a Nobel peace prize. The
overtures to Snowden, charged under espionage laws in the US, were made as
US-Russia relations sank to cold war lows. Russian officials have repeatedly
noted the absence of a bilateral extradition treaty.

Russia has often expressed concern over its citizens held in the US, namely
Viktor Bout, a convicted arms trafficker with suspected ties to Kremlin
officials.

Captions:

Vladimir Putin said: 'If (Snowden) wants to stay . . . he must stop his work
aimed at bringing harm to our American partners'

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              267 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Covert surveillance: Whistleblower's flight: Moscow stopover became end of the
line ... for now

BYLINE: Tania Branigan in Hong Kong and Miriam Elder in Moscow

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1463 words


On Monday 10 June the whistleblower Edward Snowden left the modern Mira hotel in
the heart of Kowloon's Nathan Road shopping district and melted into the busy
streets of Hong Kong, one of the most densely occupied cities in the world. He
travelled to a safe house provided by a wellwisher and, fearing he would be
recognised, did not venture out for more than a week. He was, observers
believed, showing every sign that he would stay in Hong Kong and fight his case.

Snowden engaged two lawyers known for their work on sensitive human rights and
asylum claims: solicitor Jonathan Man and barrister Robert Tibbo. Both offered
their services on a pro bono basis. Snowden also reached out, via WikiLeaks, to
the governments of third countries to discuss the possibility of refuge. Iceland
and Ecuador were top of the list, but others were also considered. Snowden
appears to have been exploring numerous possibilities.

"What WikiLeaks did with regard to Mr Snowden is to connect the legal teams
together and assist in his process in seeking for an asylum," Kristinn Hrafnsson
of WikiLeaks said in a press briefing on 24 June. WikiLeaks acted "as a
go-between carrying the requests and messages to officials in government."

While Snowden and his supporters were making plans for escape, officials in the
US were working out how to arrest him. Though it would not be revealed publicly
for another week, on Saturday 15 June, the US sent Hong Kong a request for his
surrender. The two sides have a well-used treaty and Hong Kong has proved
extremely helpful in complying with US requests in the past, experts say. This
time, however, the territory would prove notably cautious.

"Hong Kong was right to conduct its due diligence rather than going for it like
a bull at a gate," said barrister Mark Sutherland. "If the US responded slowly
and a potential suspect left in the interim - that's too bad." Others argue that
there were clear political considerations.

For the Hong Kong government, the key issue was protecting its reputation as a
place that upholds the rule of law and honours treaty obligations - essential to
its success as an international financial centre - said Joseph Cheng, professor
of political science at the City University of Hong Kong.

Like many people in the territory, Cheng takes it as a given that Beijing was
involved behind the scenes. "It did not want to be seen as bowing to pressure
from the US. Sending Mr Snowden back would have been an unpopular act," he said.
"On the other hand, it did not want to confront the US."

The following Monday, Hong Kong informed the US by email that it was considering
the issue. But the race against the clock had begun. By mid-week, WikiLeaks'
London-based volunteer Sarah Harrison had arrived to aid Snowden. Although not a
legal professional, she is believed to have extensive knowledge of asylum issues
owing to Julian Assange's case - and her two sisters, Kate and Alexandra, live
in the city. They have declined to comment.

Albert Ho, whose legal firm worked on the case, suggested Snowden feared being
sent to prison. But lawyers in the region say that he could have sought bail.
Additionally, had he applied for asylum after detention, he would have stopped
the clock on surrender proceedings, some lawyers believe, and having lodged his
appeal he could not be detained indefinitely.

By mid-week the US attorney general, Eric Holder, had called his Hong Kong
counterpart, Rimsky Yuen, to press for action. Two days later, the US turned the
pressure up publicly, with officials briefing the press that Hong Kong was
dragging its feet and the delay could damage relations.

"At no point, in all of our discussions through Friday, did the authorities in
Hong Kong raise any issues regarding the sufficiency of the US's provisional
arrest request," an unnamed US official later told the Washington Post.

That same afternoon, Hong Kong emailed the US with a list of issues. According
to the city's justice secretary, it included the fact that no passport number
was included and that Snowden's middle name appeared to have been stated wrongly
- basic details that led Hong Kong officials to dismiss the request as "sloppy".

But the justice secretary later added that the response also demanded a
clarification of whether the US had been hacking targets in the territory, as
Snowden had claimed - arguing it was crucial to his chances of mounting a
political defence to his surrender. Lawyers say such considerations are far
above the usual threshold for a warrant.

As significant as the content of that dispatch was its timing.

"Even if the US government had replied within hours, it would have been weekend
here in Hong Kong . . . basically giving Snowden the 'weekend window' to escape
out of Hong Kong," noted Surya Deva, associate professor at the City University
of Hong Kong's school of law. With events moving fast it was clear that Snowden
would have to go soon. He would have known that by Monday the US would respond.
The decision to go was made in a scramble.

On Saturday morning, the Ecuadorean consulate in London appears to have issued a
safe conduct pass for Snowden - though the government in Quito would later
describe it as unauthorised. On the same day, the US revoked his passport - a
request that Hong Kong authorities had apparently not processed.

On 23 June, two weeks after revealing his identity to the world, Snowden left
his hiding place early to drive to Chek Lap Kok airport. The Norman
Foster-designed terminals would have been quiet at that time on a Sunday. He
checked in at the Aeroflot counter for flight SU213 to Moscow. Within hours,
Hong Kong officials were informing their furious counterparts in Washington.
They then put out a public statement.

Shortly after 2pm on Sunday, Snowden's plane landed at Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport. Passengers disembarked from the nine-hour flight. Several noted an
increased police presence around the plane. At least three saw a black car drive
up to the jet.

Those transiting to other destinations, as Snowden supposedly was, passed into
the grim halls of Terminal F, a crumbling Soviet-era wing in stark contrast to
the rest of the airport's shiny new structures. No passengers said they saw the
man whose face had flooded TV screens and front pages for days. He didn't exit
with the rest of them. Snowden was nowhere to be seen.

Ecuadorian diplomats arrived at Sheremetyevo late on Sunday afternoon, but they
too did not know where to find him. The country's foreign minister, Ricardo
Patino, said later that day that Snowden had applied for political asylum.

The next day, Snowden was registered on a flight to Cuba and then onwards to
Venezuela, but he never showed up.

Russian officials finally broke their silence on Tuesday, with the foreign
minister, Sergei Lavrov, diplomatically saying that Snowden "hasn't crossed the
Russian border". Many took it as a denial of Snowden's presence in Russia,
failing to grasp Lavrov's - and the Kremlin's - love of wordplay.

Hours later, during a visit to Finland, Vladimir Putin said Snowden was indeed
in Sheremetyevo's transit zone. Russia would never give him up, he said,
praising his role as a human rights activist. He denied that Russia's spy
agencies were working with the whistleblower.

For many that was hard to believe, considering Putin's growing animosity with
the United States and the fact that Snowden was clearly hiding, or being hidden
by someone.

Amid intense US lobbying, Ecuadorean support for Snowden began to fade. Late on
Sunday night, Harrison approached the consular office in Sheremetyevo's Terminal
F carrying a request for political asylum in Russia.

The consular officer on duty, Kim Shevchenko, accepted it and called the foreign
ministry. They are now studying the request. Putin said that Snowden would have
to stop "harming" the US if he hoped to stay in Russia, the first public
admission that Snowden could stay in Russia for ever. Whether by chance or
design, Snowden now seems ever more likely to remain in Russia, something sure
to infuriate the United States.

"It wasn't the plan to get him and to use him," said Fyodor Lukyanov, a Russian
foreign policy analyst. "For Russia, of course, the best scenario would be if he
left for a third country but there is no country that seems eager to get him.
Since there is no alternative, maybe he will stay."

Captions:

The Hong Kong flag. The region apparently did not process the US's revoking of
Snowden's passport on 22 June

Russia broke its silence last week when Sergei Lavrov, the foreign minis-ter,
said Snowden had not 'crossed the Russian border'

Man of the moment

A television screen shows a news report of Edward Snowden at a shopping mall in
Hong Kong where, observers believed, he would stay to fight his case

Photograph: Vincent Yu/AP

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              268 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       July 2, 2013 Tuesday 11:20 AM GMT

Ecuador's president Rafael Correa says helping NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden
was a 'mistake';
Meanwhile, Snowden withdraws application for asylum from Russia after Putin says
he must stop harming American partners

BYLINE: Heather Saul

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 842 words


Ecuador's president Rafael Correa has said the country is not considering Edward
Snowden's request for asylum, saying that he is now Russia's responsibility.

He described the decision to issue Snowden with a temporary travel pass after
his passport was revoked by the US government as "a mistake on our part", during
an interview with the Guardian.

The Ecuadorian president said that the travel document issued on 22 June by his
London consul was a "blunder", and that the "crisis hit us at a very vulnerable
moment."

Mr Correa explained: "Our foreign minister was touring Asia. Our deputy foreign
minister was in the Czech Republic. Our US ambassador was in Italy.

"The consul, in his desperation, probably he couldn't reach the foreign
minister... and he issued a safe conduct document without validity, without
authorisation, without us even knowing."

He said that Snowden is no longer the responsibility of Ecuador. "Are we
responsible for getting him to Ecuador? It's not logical. The country that has
to give him a safe conduct document is Russia."

Russia seem unlikely to offer the fugitive any help however. Snowden appeared to
have dropped his request for asylum in Russia after President Vladimir Putin
said he should stop "harming our American partners", the Kremlin said on
Tuesday.

However, Venezuelan president Nicolas Maduro said that they had not yet received
a request for asylum from Snowden, but that he "deserves the world's
protection". Speaking during a visit to Moscow on Tuesday, Mr Maduro said they
would only make a decision over whether to grant Snowden asylum in Venezula when
they the request is made for it.

"We think this young person has done something very important for humanity, has
done a favor to humanity, has spoken great truths to deconstruct a world that...
is controlled by an imperialist American elite," he added.

Mr Correa's comments sit at odds with a letter written by Snowden and addressed
to the Ecuadorian government, where the whistleblower praised the country for
placing the "human rights of an individual against the most powerful government
on earth".

In the letter, Mr Snowden had described the "deep respect for your principles
and sincere thanks for your government's action in considering my request for
political asylum."

WikiLeaks have also released a statement attributed to Mr Snowden, which has
caused consternation in Quito. It read: "My continued liberty has been owed to
the efforts of friends new and old, family, and others who I have never met and
probably never will. I trusted them with my life and they returned that trust
with a faith in me for which I will always be thankful."

Snowden has already applied for asylum in at least 15 countries, the WikiLeaks
website said on Monday.

Both Spain and Finland said on Tuesday that any application by Snowden for
asylum would be invalid because he is not on their soil. Norway said it was
unlikely that he would be granted asylum there.

He has previously asked for safe haven in Ecuador and Iceland, and yesterday it
was announced he had requested help from Russia.

Russian president Vladimir Putin had said previously that Mr Snowden would have
to stop leaking US secrets if he wanted to get asylum there.

The former CIA analyst, who is wanted for leaking details of secret surveillance
operations in the UK and US, has been in limbo since his arrival in Moscow from
Hong Kong on June 23.

In a statement published on the WikiLeaks website he accused President Barack
Obama of denying him a right to asylum and of putting political pressure on
countries where he has requested refuge.

Mr Snowden said the President was practising the "old, bad tools of political
aggression", saying that such "deception" was "not justice".

In the statement Mr Snowden thanked "friends new and old" for his continued
liberty, adding: "On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he
would not permit any diplomatic "wheeling and dealing" over my case.

"Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President to pressure the leaders of nations from which I have
requested protection to deny my asylum petitions.

"This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me."

Mr Snowden said the White House was "using citizenship as a weapon" and had
denied him the right to seek asylum by revoking his passport, "leaving me a
stateless person" and stopping him from "exercising a basic human right... the
right to seek asylum".

He added: "In the end the Obama administration is not afraid of whistleblowers
like me, Bradley Manning or Thomas Drake. We are stateless, imprisoned, or
powerless. No, the Obama administration is afraid of you. It is afraid of an
informed, angry public demanding the constitutional government it was promised -
and it should be.

"I am unbowed in my convictions and impressed at the efforts taken by so many."

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              269 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden's fate is up to Russia, Ecuadorean president says

BYLINE: WILLIAM NEUMAN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: PORTOVIEJO, Ecuador

ABSTRACT

With Russian officials maintaining that the fugitive American is not their
problem, the president's remarks added to a growing sense that he is stuck in
geopolitical limbo in a Moscow airport.

FULL TEXT

President Rafael Correa of Ecuador has said that while there are weighty
arguments for granting asylum to the fugitive U.S. intelligence leaker Edward J.
Snowden, it is up to Russia to decide what happens to him.

But with Russian officials maintaining that Mr. Snowden is not their problem,
the president's remarks Sunday added to a growing sense that Mr. Snowden is
stuck in geopolitical limbo in a Moscow airport, where he has apparently been
since he flew there from Hong Kong on June 23.

Mr. Snowden, who is wanted in the United States on charges of breaking espionage
laws, has applied for asylum in Ecuador, but Mr. Correa said that his government
could not begin to consider the request until Mr. Snowden reached Ecuador or one
of its embassies. Mr. Snowden's U.S. passport has been revoked; without it, he
would appear to be unable either to pass through Russian immigration control or
to travel on to another country.

''He's in the international area of the Moscow airport, but basically under the
care of the Russian authorities,'' Mr. Correa said in an interview. ''Strictly
speaking, the case is not in our hands.''

Russian leaders disclaim responsibility as well, noting that the transit zone of
Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow, where Mr. Snowden is believed to be cloistered,
is legally considered to be outside Russia's borders.

A Russian immigration official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said
that Mr. Snowden had not applied for a visa, which would be needed to leave the
transit zone, and that he could remain there indefinitely if he wanted. There
have been cases of asylum-seekers living in the transit zone for as long as nine
months.

Dmitri S. Peskov, the press secretary to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia,
said in a radio broadcast Sunday that Mr. Snowden's situation ''is not one on
the Kremlin's agenda.'' Mr. Peskov said in a separate interview that Mr. Snowden
had not applied for asylum in Russia.

Mr. Correa said that his ambassador to Moscow had met with Mr. Snowden on his
second day at the airport and that he had instructed the ambassador to see Mr.
Snowden again, to tell him why Ecuador could not yet consider his application.

Mr. Correa provided some new details about how Mr. Snowden's truncated dash for
refuge unfolded. He said that the country's foreign minister, Ricardo Patiño,
probably discussed the possibility of asylum for Mr. Snowden when he met in
London with Julian Assange, the founder of the anti-secrecy organization
WikiLeaks, several days before Mr. Snowden left Hong Kong.

Mr. Assange has been living in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London for more than a
year, after taking refuge there to avoid being extradited to Sweden, where he is
wanted for questioning in a sexual assault case. He was not involved in the
release of classified documents by Mr. Snowden, but his group has been
counseling Mr. Snowden since the two men met.

Mr. Correa said that he learned of Mr. Snowden's request on June 23, the day Mr.
Snowden flew to Moscow, and that the request was not a surprise, because Mr.
Assange had let Ecuadorean officials know that it was likely.

Mr. Correa indicated that the asylum request would get sympathetic consideration
if Mr. Snowden were able to get to Ecuador or to an embassy.

''Perhaps he broke the law of the United States, but in order to tell the truth
to the United States, the American people and the entire world, and it's a very
urgent truth,'' Mr. Correa said. ''I think that this is a weighty argument in
deciding whether or not to give him asylum.''

On Sunday, Mr. Assange said in an interview on the ABC program ''This Week''
that more secrets would surface from the material taken by Mr. Snowden.

''Look, there is no stopping the publishing process at this stage,'' Mr. Assange
said, speaking from London. ''Great care has been taken to make sure that Mr.
Snowden can't be pressured by any state to stop the publication process.''

Mr. Assange seemed to suggest that by canceling Mr. Snowden's passport and
leaving him ''for the moment marooned in Russia,'' the United States had played
into the Russian spy services' hands, giving them the opportunity to examine the
hard drives on the four laptop computers that Mr. Snowden is believed to be
carrying. ''Is that really a great outcome by the State Department?'' Mr.
Assange said.

As for Mr. Assange's refuge in the Ecuadorean Embassy, Mr. Correa said: ''He
will always be welcome. If this isn't resolved and he wants to spend 50 years in
the embassy, for us there is no problem. He's under the protection of Ecuador.''

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: , and Eric Schmitt from Washington

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              270 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden applies for political asylum in Russia

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 615 words


Vladimir Putin has for the first time floated the idea of United States
whistleblower Edward Snowden remaining in Russia, hours after the fugitive
applied for political asylum in the country.

Mr Snowden applied for asylum at the consular office at Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport at 10:30pm last Sunday evening through his WikiLeaks handler, Sarah
Harrison, a consular official said.

"The UK citizen Sarah Harrison passed on a request by Edward Snowden to be
granted political asylum," said Kim Shevchenko, of the airport's consular
department. He said he then called the foreign ministry, who sent a courier an
hour later to pick up the request.

He declined to say where Ms Harrison or Mr Snowden, who have not been seen since
landing in Sheremetyevo last week, were staying. "She didn't say and I didn't
ask," he said.

'Our American partners'

In a move likely to enrage the US, Mr Putin said yesterday

: "If he wants to go somewhere and someone will take him, go ahead. If he wants
to stay here, there is one condition: he must stop his work aimed at bringing
harm to our American partners, as strange as that sounds coming from my mouth."

Mr Snowden has been in the airport since June 23rd, after flying in from Hong
Kong, from where he leaked secret documents detailing US National Security
Agency surveillance programmes.

Stripped of his US passport, he has been stuck in limbo since.

His attempts to get political asylum in Ecuador, whose London embassy is
sheltering WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, appear to have dried up amid
intense US lobbying and reported disagreements within the Ecuadorean government.

Snowden met Russian diplomats yesterday morning and handed them a list of 15
countries to which he would like to apply for political asylum, the Los Angeles
Times reported, citing an unnamed source in the foreign ministry.

Mr Putin appeared to leave himself some latitude, noting Mr Snowden would be
unlikely to meet his conditions for staying in Russia.

"Considering that he considers himself a human rights activist and a fighter for
human rights, he probably doesn't plan to stop this work, so he should choose a
host country and head there," Mr Putin said.

"When this will happen I, unfortunately, do not know."

Speaking at a press conference after a meeting of gas exporting countries, he
reiterated that Russia would not extradite Mr Snowden to the US.

"Russia never gives anyone up and doesn't plan to give anyone up. And no one has
ever given us anyone."

'Snowden is not our agent'For the second time Mr Putin, unprompted, insisted Mr
Snowden was not working with Russia's secret services. "Mr Snowden is not our
agent, never was and isn't today. Our special services have never worked with
him and are not working with him."

Russia maintains one of the world's most developed intelligence mechanisms and
is widely believed to engage in snooping on its own citizens.

Nicolas Maduro, the Venezuelan president, is in Moscow for the two-day gas
conference and it was believed he and Mr Putin would discuss Mr Snowden's fate.

Mr Putin's foreign policy advisor, Yury Ushakov, said the two had not discussed
Mr Snowden yet.

A campaign calling for Mr Snowden to stay in Russia has gathered momentum since
he first arrived in Moscow. Yesterday morning, several MPs and influential
Russians floated the idea during a meeting of the Public Chamber, a body that
advises the Kremlin.

"It's not right that Snowden is sitting in this terminal like in a prison," said
Sergei Markov, a former MP with close ties to the Kremlin.

"Unlike prison, he can't even go out and breathe fresh air. On humanitarian
grounds, I think he should be presented with a way to enter Russian territory."-
(Guardian service)

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              271 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 2, 2013 Tuesday 11:08 AM GMT+4

Russian press review - 1

LENGTH: 1179 words


Snowden asks for political asylum in Russia

On Monday, former CIA staffer Edward Snowden, wanted by the U.S. authorities for
the theft of government information and divulging U.S. intelligence secrets to
the world, filed a request for political asylum in Russia. Meanwhile, President
Vladimir Putin named the condition under which Russia could grant Snowden's
request.

"At 22:30, Moscow time, on Monday, British national Sarah Harrison contacted the
consulate office at the Sheremetyevo airport. She introduced herself as a lawyer
and authorized representative of U.S. citizen Snowden. She passed Snowden's
request to grant him political asylum in Russia,"on-duty consulate official Kim
Shevchenko said. He added that he had personally taken a package of documents
from Harrison, got in touch with the Russian Foreign Ministry and dispatched the
documents by courier, the Komsomolskaya Pravda writes.

Initially, the Federal Migration Service denied Edward Snowden's request for
political asylum, but sources in Russian law-enforcement bodies specified that
in case he applied, his application would be reviewed even in the absence of
passport or other ID document, the Rossiiskaya Gazeta notes. However, getting
political asylum in Russia in not that easy. It requires the consent of not only
the Federal Migration Service, but also the Foreign Ministry, the Interior
Ministry and the Federal Security Service.

The Izvestia reports on the statement made by Vladimir Putin on Monday, as he
was speaking at the Gas Exporting Countries Forum. Separately, the president
underlined that the rumors alleging that Snowden was an agent of Russian secret
services did not correspond to reality, the newspaper said. However, he
confirmed that Russia did not intend to extradite Snowden to the USA which had
already opened several criminal cases again him.

"Russia never hands anybody over anywhere and doesn't intend to do so. Nobody
ever gave anyone up to us, you know it well," Putin said, "at best, we exchanged
our Foreign Intelligence Service agents for those who were detained and arrested
and convicted in a Russian Federation court."

However, Putin did not officially invite Snowden to stay in Russia.

"If he wants to stay here, there is one condition: he must stop his work aimed
at harming our American partners, as strange as that sounds coming from my
lips," the newspaper cited Putin as saying.

The experts polled by the Kommersant believe that Edward Snowden's actions do
not look unexpected, as they have become a logical consequence of the deadlock
in which he found himself.

"After flying to the Sheremetyevo airport, Snowden actually found himself in a
situation where he is a cornered person. As the matter stands know, Russia seems
to be the only country in the world ready to go for a conflict with the USA in
the dispute over the future of the fugitive American. This circumstance was
decisive in Snowden's decision, director of the Moscow Carnegie center Dmitry
Trenin told the newspaper. In his opinion, the spat will not dramatically worsen
Russian-U.S. relations, yet it may strengthen the trend toward scaling them
down.

In its editorial, the Nezavismaya Gazeta writes that Snowden bewildered Russia.
In the newspaper's opinion, there is not good solution for Moscow in the story
with the U.S. fugitive.

"Hand Snowden over to the Americans? muses the newspaper, "Rights activists and
a considerable portion of the mass media sympathizing with the former CIA
employee will take a very negative stance. Grant him asylum or let go to
Ecuador? Nobody will see a principled substantive position in it; they will
certainly regard it as an anti-American gesture. The solution of the problem is
being delayed. It is as if Russia has been put on a narrow bed, and it is
tossing and turning trying to make itself comfortable."

x x x

Russian Academy of Sciences reform causes public outcry

The unexpected reform of the Russian Academy of Sciences /RAS/ recently
announced by the government caused quite a stir, and drew criticism from
academicians in the first place. Speaker of the State Duma lower house of the
Russian parliament Sergei Naryshkin stated on Monday that the RAS reform bill
would not be adopted in package in the near future. The first reading is due on
Tuesday, and the final voting is scheduled for the autumn. At the same time, the
Communist faction at the State Duma is initiating a vote of no-confidence in the
government in connection with the RAN reform scandal.

On Monday, only negative opinions of the bill were coming from RAN. Its Far
Eastern branch demanded the resignation of Dmitry Medvedev's Cabinet, the
Nezavisimaya Gazeta reports. Also, it turned out that there was no need to hurry
the passage of the government-proposed bill on RAS restructuring, merging it
with other academies or changing the management mechanism responsible for
research funding. After a meeting of the State Duma council, speaker Sergei
Naryshkin confirmed that the first reading would take place on July 3 and that
it would be followed by a pause. According to the speaker, the final approval of
the RAN reform plan is postponed to the autumn. In the meantime, various
proposals on improving the bill will be put up for discussion.

As for the Communist faction, the RAS reform became a pretext for announcing a
vote of no-confidence in the government. The Communists will be gathering
lawmakers' signatures until the end of this week, while the issue of
no-confidence will be broached in September once the lawmakers return from the
holiday. As the Kommersant notes, there have been no such attempts for eight
years.

The Kommersant also notes that the government bill had encountered serious
resistance as scientists across the whole country promised to stage protests.
The presidium of RAN's Far Eastern branch demanded Cabinet resignation, with its
scientists blasting the government's actions as "irresponsible, cynical and
doomed to failure." For its part, RAN's Siberian branch saw a connection between
the reform with "the obvious failure" of the Rosnano and Skolkovo projects,
describing it as "an attempt to avoid responsibility for the failure of these
projects and misuse of large federal budget funds."

Other parties did not support the Communists' initiatives, the RBK Daily notes.
"These are emotions. Let them initiate, let them present arguments; we'll see,"
A Just Russia leader Sergei Mironov said.

The government took the news about the demand for its resignation with a touch
of humor. "It's a good example of democracy," Deputy Prime Minister Olga
Golodets said.

Leader of the United Russia faction Vladimir Vasilyev regretted the Opposition
faction's taking a radically negative position toward the proposed legislation
"without looking into the matter," the Rossiiskaya Gazeta writes. United Russia
has a different approach: "while stating claims to the education minister over
the ongoing reform, having taken it under control and bearing responsibility, we
nevertheless support this decision. And we state it openly, so that politics
could indeed be public."

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              272 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      July 2, 2013 Tuesday 01:57 PM GMT+4

Operations of shift consular dept at Moscow airport impeded by situation arnd
Snowden

LENGTH: 386 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW July 2


- Situation around the fugitive CIA technical analyst Edward Snowden, who is
staying in the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, has heavily
impeded the operations of the airport's department of shift consuls.

An Itar-Tass reporter said in a dispatch from the airport that consuls, who are
usually working shifts at the airport, do not answer any calls either on the
intercom or on the local exchange net. Most obviously, they have been overflowed
with requests from reporters trying to clear out Snowden's further destiny.

Monday night, a duty consul at the airport confirmed that Snowden had filed a
request for political asylum.

"I hereby confirm that the British national Sarah Harrison handed Snowden's
request for political asylum to us at 22:30 Monday," he said. "We sent a signal
upstairs and then a state courier came to the airport and picked up the package
of documents."

Edward Snowden, 30, a former technical specialist at the CIA, leaked
informational on the existence of two secret programs run by the U.S. National
Security Agency to intercept the telephone calls and Internet message exchanges
processed via servers on the U.S. territory.

He made his revelations public while on a trip in Hong Kong where he took an
Aeroflot flight for Moscow June 23.

On the next day, he was supposed to fly to Cuba but he did not get aboard the
Aeroflot jet eventually. He is still staying in the Sheremetyevo transit zone.

The U.S. is putting pressure on Russia in a bid to wring out his extradition.

Russia's Federal Migration Service, the scope of duties of which includes the
examination of applications for political asylum, has not received any such
applications from Snowden so far.

"We didn't get a request from Snowden," a source at the service said.

President Vladimir Putin's press secretary Dmitry Peskov explained for the
situation saying that Snowden had himself revoked the application upon learning
Putin's stance on the situation around him.

Putin told reporters Monday that Snowden could stay behind in Russia on the
condition of fully renouncing any anti-American actions.

Peskov reiterated that the Russian secret services had never worked with Snowden
and he was not their agent.

He also said that Russia has never given up anyone to others in the past and
will not be doing it in the future either.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              273 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Snowden lashes out from limbo;
The NSA leaker accuses Obama of 'deception' by punishing him for 'revealing the
truth.'

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko, Carol J. Williams

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


Edward Snowden plaintively appealed Monday from his diplomatic limbo in Moscow
for relief from what he described as President Obama's use of "deception" and
the "bad tools of political aggression" in pressuring other countries to deny
him asylum.

In a statement posted on WikiLeaks' website, the fugitive former National
Security Agency analyst accused Obama of seeking to make him stateless.

Snowden's first communication in more than a week exuded the strain of being
trapped in a diplomatic no man's land and seeing earlier offers of refuge being
rescinded.

Russian news media reported Monday that Snowden had applied for asylum in Russia
and 14 other countries. But Russian President Vladimir Putin made it clear that
any grant of refuge would be contingent on Snowden ceasing to leak sensitive
classified information "aimed at damaging our American partners."

The 30-year-old Snowden had his U.S. passport revoked midway through what has
been a monthlong, globe-trotting flight after revealing a massive domestic and
international surveillance program by U.S. intelligence.

Snowden has been holed up in a transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport for
more than a week, without documents that allow him to proceed through passport
control, purchase plane tickets on outbound flights or even change currency or
access foreign bank accounts.

He accused the U.S. government of threatening his freedom and safety "for
revealing the truth."

"This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extra-legal penalty of exile," Snowden wrote. "These are the old, bad tools of
political aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would
come after me."

Snowden remains a U.S. citizen despite having his passport invalidated, and
administration officials have said his return to the United States would be
facilitated if he decided to face the espionage charges against him.

"The Obama administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a
weapon," Snowden lamented. "Although I am convicted of nothing, it has
unilaterally revoked my passport, leaving me a stateless person."

He was issued special travel documents by Ecuadorean diplomats in Moscow last
week but officials in Quito, Ecuador's capital, canceled them, saying they were
improperly provided.

Ecuadorean officials initially hinted that they would give Snowden refuge. But a
lucrative trade pact with Washington expired Sunday and fears that it won't be
renewed could be behind Quito's apparently revised attitude toward Snowden. Some
officials in Quito have renounced the trade pact, saying it would be used by the
U.S. as "blackmail." But the special status granted Ecuadorean goods is worth
$400 million a year, and as many as 40,000 jobs could be lost without a new
deal.

As reverberations from Snowden's disclosures of NSA surveillance continued to
echo internationally, Putin offered head-spinning comments about the American
fugitive.

"If he wants to go somewhere and somebody will host him -- no problem," Putin
said at a news conference. "If he wants to stay here, there is one condition: He
must stop his work aimed at harming our American partners."

Putin acknowledged the oddity of insisting on protection of U.S. secrets, saying
he was sincere about muzzling Snowden "no matter how strange it may sound on my
lips." Putin added, though, that Snowden appears to have no intention of
stopping his leaks, "so he must choose for himself a country to stay in and move
there."

There has been widespread speculation that any secret data Snowden is carrying
has already been compromised by Chinese and Russian intelligence during his
stays in Hong Kong and Moscow.

Igor Korotchenko, editor in chief of the monthly National Defense journal, said
Putin was, in effect, offering a peace deal to the United States.

"Putin publicly pledged that if Snowden stays in Russia, the Kremlin will do its
best to prevent any public exposures in the Russian mass media of the CIA's and
NSA's secret activities," Korotchenko said. "Washington should see this as a
fair deal, a much better bargain than if Snowden goes on to Venezuela and
continues to expose U.S. special services' operations."

Russia has been hosting a meeting of the world's major gas-exporting countries.
Among those attending was Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro. There has been
speculation that Snowden might fly to Caracas with Maduro to evade being
arrested in transit.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

carol.williams@latimes.com

Loiko reported from Moscow and Williams from Los Angeles.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              274 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden slams Obama, asks for Russian asylum

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 619 words


Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has broken his silence and lashed out
at U.S. President Barack Obama for pressuring world leaders to deny him asylum.

His comments, posted in an editorial on the whistleblowing site Wikileaks, came
soon after reports emerged on Monday night that Snowden, who has been holed up
in Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone for over a week, has asked for political
asylum in Russia.

'On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he would not permit
any diplomatic 'wheeling and dealing' over my case,' Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, wrote.

'Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President [Joe Biden]to pressure the leaders of nations from
which I have requested protection to deny my asylum petitions,' Snowden said.

'This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me,' he added. 'For decades the United States of America has been one of the
strongest defenders of the human right to seek asylum. Sadly, this right... is
now being rejected by the current government of my country. The Obama
administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon' by
revoking Snowden's passport.

Snowden has not been spotted by journalists in Sheremetyevo's transit zone since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had suggested Monday that Snowden could stay in
Russia, but only on 'one condition: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
US partners, as strange as this may sound coming from me,' Putin said at a press
conference Monday evening after a meeting with leaders of countries from the Gas
Exporting Countries Forum, including Bolivia and Venezuela, where Snowden
reportedly has also sought asylum.

Putin called Snowden 'a fighter for human rights, for democracy' and compared
him to Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov. 'Precisely because he feels himself to
be a rights campaigner, evidently he does not intend to stop this work. So he
should choose a country and move there,' he said according to an official
transcript of the news conference posted on the presidential site.

Shortly after Putin's comments, reports emerged that Snowden had requested
Russian asylum.

"At 22:30 Moscow time yesterday [on Sunday], UK citizen Sarah Harrison addressed
the consulate in the Sheremetyevo Airport with a request on behalf of Edward
Snowden to grant him political asylum,' Kim Shevchenko, the consulate's diplomat
on duty, was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying.

Wikileaks confirmed Tuesday that Russia was among 21 countries where Snowden had
requested asylum, including Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Ecuador, as well as India,
Italy, and Poland.

Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Radoslaw Sikorski confirmed on his Twitter that
Snowden had filed an asylum request, but wrote that 'even if it was filled out
correctly, I would not give him a positive recommendation.'

The U.S. had held 'high-level discussions with the Russians about trying to find
a solution to the problem" of Snowden's extradition, President Obama said on
Monday during an official visit to Tanzania. Earlier on Monday, Russian Security
Council head Nikolai Patrushev had said that the presidents of Russia and the
United States had instructed the heads of both countries' national security
services, the FSB and the FBI, to 'keep constant contact and search for a
possible solution,' RIA Novosti reported.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              276 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden slams Obama, asks for Russian asylum

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 619 words


Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has broken his silence and lashed out
at U.S. President Barack Obama for pressuring world leaders to deny him asylum.

His comments, posted in an editorial on the whistleblowing site Wikileaks, came
soon after reports emerged on Monday night that Snowden, who has been holed up
in Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone for over a week, has asked for political
asylum in Russia.

'On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he would not permit
any diplomatic 'wheeling and dealing' over my case,' Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, wrote.

'Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President [Joe Biden]to pressure the leaders of nations from
which I have requested protection to deny my asylum petitions,' Snowden said.

'This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me,' he added. 'For decades the United States of America has been one of the
strongest defenders of the human right to seek asylum. Sadly, this right... is
now being rejected by the current government of my country. The Obama
administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon' by
revoking Snowden's passport.

Snowden has not been spotted by journalists in Sheremetyevo's transit zone since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had suggested Monday that Snowden could stay in
Russia, but only on 'one condition: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
US partners, as strange as this may sound coming from me,' Putin said at a press
conference Monday evening after a meeting with leaders of countries from the Gas
Exporting Countries Forum, including Bolivia and Venezuela, where Snowden
reportedly has also sought asylum.

Putin called Snowden 'a fighter for human rights, for democracy' and compared
him to Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov. 'Precisely because he feels himself to
be a rights campaigner, evidently he does not intend to stop this work. So he
should choose a country and move there,' he said according to an official
transcript of the news conference posted on the presidential site.

Shortly after Putin's comments, reports emerged that Snowden had requested
Russian asylum.

"At 22:30 Moscow time yesterday [on Sunday], UK citizen Sarah Harrison addressed
the consulate in the Sheremetyevo Airport with a request on behalf of Edward
Snowden to grant him political asylum,' Kim Shevchenko, the consulate's diplomat
on duty, was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying.

Wikileaks confirmed Tuesday that Russia was among 21 countries where Snowden had
requested asylum, including Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Ecuador, as well as India,
Italy, and Poland.

Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Radoslaw Sikorski confirmed on his Twitter that
Snowden had filed an asylum request, but wrote that 'even if it was filled out
correctly, I would not give him a positive recommendation.'

The U.S. had held 'high-level discussions with the Russians about trying to find
a solution to the problem" of Snowden's extradition, President Obama said on
Monday during an official visit to Tanzania. Earlier on Monday, Russian Security
Council head Nikolai Patrushev had said that the presidents of Russia and the
United States had instructed the heads of both countries' national security
services, the FSB and the FBI, to 'keep constant contact and search for a
possible solution,' RIA Novosti reported.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              292 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden slams Obama, asks for Russian asylum

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 619 words


Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has broken his silence and lashed out
at U.S. President Barack Obama for pressuring world leaders to deny him asylum.

His comments, posted in an editorial on the whistleblowing site Wikileaks, came
soon after reports emerged on Monday night that Snowden, who has been holed up
in Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone for over a week, has asked for political
asylum in Russia.

'On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he would not permit
any diplomatic 'wheeling and dealing' over my case,' Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, wrote.

'Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President [Joe Biden]to pressure the leaders of nations from
which I have requested protection to deny my asylum petitions,' Snowden said.

'This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me,' he added. 'For decades the United States of America has been one of the
strongest defenders of the human right to seek asylum. Sadly, this right... is
now being rejected by the current government of my country. The Obama
administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon' by
revoking Snowden's passport.

Snowden has not been spotted by journalists in Sheremetyevo's transit zone since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had suggested Monday that Snowden could stay in
Russia, but only on 'one condition: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
US partners, as strange as this may sound coming from me,' Putin said at a press
conference Monday evening after a meeting with leaders of countries from the Gas
Exporting Countries Forum, including Bolivia and Venezuela, where Snowden
reportedly has also sought asylum.

Putin called Snowden 'a fighter for human rights, for democracy' and compared
him to Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov. 'Precisely because he feels himself to
be a rights campaigner, evidently he does not intend to stop this work. So he
should choose a country and move there,' he said according to an official
transcript of the news conference posted on the presidential site.

Shortly after Putin's comments, reports emerged that Snowden had requested
Russian asylum.

"At 22:30 Moscow time yesterday [on Sunday], UK citizen Sarah Harrison addressed
the consulate in the Sheremetyevo Airport with a request on behalf of Edward
Snowden to grant him political asylum,' Kim Shevchenko, the consulate's diplomat
on duty, was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying.

Wikileaks confirmed Tuesday that Russia was among 21 countries where Snowden had
requested asylum, including Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Ecuador, as well as India,
Italy, and Poland.

Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Radoslaw Sikorski confirmed on his Twitter that
Snowden had filed an asylum request, but wrote that 'even if it was filled out
correctly, I would not give him a positive recommendation.'

The U.S. had held 'high-level discussions with the Russians about trying to find
a solution to the problem" of Snowden's extradition, President Obama said on
Monday during an official visit to Tanzania. Earlier on Monday, Russian Security
Council head Nikolai Patrushev had said that the presidents of Russia and the
United States had instructed the heads of both countries' national security
services, the FSB and the FBI, to 'keep constant contact and search for a
possible solution,' RIA Novosti reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              303 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden slams Obama, asks for Russian asylum

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 619 words


Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has broken his silence and lashed out
at U.S. President Barack Obama for pressuring world leaders to deny him asylum.

His comments, posted in an editorial on the whistleblowing site Wikileaks, came
soon after reports emerged on Monday night that Snowden, who has been holed up
in Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone for over a week, has asked for political
asylum in Russia.

'On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he would not permit
any diplomatic 'wheeling and dealing' over my case,' Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, wrote.

'Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President [Joe Biden]to pressure the leaders of nations from
which I have requested protection to deny my asylum petitions,' Snowden said.

'This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me,' he added. 'For decades the United States of America has been one of the
strongest defenders of the human right to seek asylum. Sadly, this right... is
now being rejected by the current government of my country. The Obama
administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon' by
revoking Snowden's passport.

Snowden has not been spotted by journalists in Sheremetyevo's transit zone since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had suggested Monday that Snowden could stay in
Russia, but only on 'one condition: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
US partners, as strange as this may sound coming from me,' Putin said at a press
conference Monday evening after a meeting with leaders of countries from the Gas
Exporting Countries Forum, including Bolivia and Venezuela, where Snowden
reportedly has also sought asylum.

Putin called Snowden 'a fighter for human rights, for democracy' and compared
him to Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov. 'Precisely because he feels himself to
be a rights campaigner, evidently he does not intend to stop this work. So he
should choose a country and move there,' he said according to an official
transcript of the news conference posted on the presidential site.

Shortly after Putin's comments, reports emerged that Snowden had requested
Russian asylum.

"At 22:30 Moscow time yesterday [on Sunday], UK citizen Sarah Harrison addressed
the consulate in the Sheremetyevo Airport with a request on behalf of Edward
Snowden to grant him political asylum,' Kim Shevchenko, the consulate's diplomat
on duty, was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying.

Wikileaks confirmed Tuesday that Russia was among 21 countries where Snowden had
requested asylum, including Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Ecuador, as well as India,
Italy, and Poland.

Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Radoslaw Sikorski confirmed on his Twitter that
Snowden had filed an asylum request, but wrote that 'even if it was filled out
correctly, I would not give him a positive recommendation.'

The U.S. had held 'high-level discussions with the Russians about trying to find
a solution to the problem" of Snowden's extradition, President Obama said on
Monday during an official visit to Tanzania. Earlier on Monday, Russian Security
Council head Nikolai Patrushev had said that the presidents of Russia and the
United States had instructed the heads of both countries' national security
services, the FSB and the FBI, to 'keep constant contact and search for a
possible solution,' RIA Novosti reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              317 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden slams Obama, asks for Russian asylum

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 619 words


Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has broken his silence and lashed out
at U.S. President Barack Obama for pressuring world leaders to deny him asylum.

His comments, posted in an editorial on the whistleblowing site Wikileaks, came
soon after reports emerged on Monday night that Snowden, who has been holed up
in Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone for over a week, has asked for political
asylum in Russia.

'On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he would not permit
any diplomatic 'wheeling and dealing' over my case,' Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, wrote.

'Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President [Joe Biden]to pressure the leaders of nations from
which I have requested protection to deny my asylum petitions,' Snowden said.

'This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me,' he added. 'For decades the United States of America has been one of the
strongest defenders of the human right to seek asylum. Sadly, this right... is
now being rejected by the current government of my country. The Obama
administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon' by
revoking Snowden's passport.

Snowden has not been spotted by journalists in Sheremetyevo's transit zone since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had suggested Monday that Snowden could stay in
Russia, but only on 'one condition: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
US partners, as strange as this may sound coming from me,' Putin said at a press
conference Monday evening after a meeting with leaders of countries from the Gas
Exporting Countries Forum, including Bolivia and Venezuela, where Snowden
reportedly has also sought asylum.

Putin called Snowden 'a fighter for human rights, for democracy' and compared
him to Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov. 'Precisely because he feels himself to
be a rights campaigner, evidently he does not intend to stop this work. So he
should choose a country and move there,' he said according to an official
transcript of the news conference posted on the presidential site.

Shortly after Putin's comments, reports emerged that Snowden had requested
Russian asylum.

"At 22:30 Moscow time yesterday [on Sunday], UK citizen Sarah Harrison addressed
the consulate in the Sheremetyevo Airport with a request on behalf of Edward
Snowden to grant him political asylum,' Kim Shevchenko, the consulate's diplomat
on duty, was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying.

Wikileaks confirmed Tuesday that Russia was among 21 countries where Snowden had
requested asylum, including Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Ecuador, as well as India,
Italy, and Poland.

Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Radoslaw Sikorski confirmed on his Twitter that
Snowden had filed an asylum request, but wrote that 'even if it was filled out
correctly, I would not give him a positive recommendation.'

The U.S. had held 'high-level discussions with the Russians about trying to find
a solution to the problem" of Snowden's extradition, President Obama said on
Monday during an official visit to Tanzania. Earlier on Monday, Russian Security
Council head Nikolai Patrushev had said that the presidents of Russia and the
United States had instructed the heads of both countries' national security
services, the FSB and the FBI, to 'keep constant contact and search for a
possible solution,' RIA Novosti reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              319 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden slams Obama, asks for Russian asylum

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 619 words


Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has broken his silence and lashed out
at U.S. President Barack Obama for pressuring world leaders to deny him asylum.

His comments, posted in an editorial on the whistleblowing site Wikileaks, came
soon after reports emerged on Monday night that Snowden, who has been holed up
in Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone for over a week, has asked for political
asylum in Russia.

'On Thursday, President Obama declared before the world that he would not permit
any diplomatic 'wheeling and dealing' over my case,' Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program, wrote.

'Yet now it is being reported that after promising not to do so, the President
ordered his Vice President [Joe Biden]to pressure the leaders of nations from
which I have requested protection to deny my asylum petitions,' Snowden said.

'This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile. These are the old, bad tools of political
aggression. Their purpose is to frighten, not me, but those who would come after
me,' he added. 'For decades the United States of America has been one of the
strongest defenders of the human right to seek asylum. Sadly, this right... is
now being rejected by the current government of my country. The Obama
administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a weapon' by
revoking Snowden's passport.

Snowden has not been spotted by journalists in Sheremetyevo's transit zone since
arriving from Hong Kong on June 23.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had suggested Monday that Snowden could stay in
Russia, but only on 'one condition: He must stop his work aimed at harming our
US partners, as strange as this may sound coming from me,' Putin said at a press
conference Monday evening after a meeting with leaders of countries from the Gas
Exporting Countries Forum, including Bolivia and Venezuela, where Snowden
reportedly has also sought asylum.

Putin called Snowden 'a fighter for human rights, for democracy' and compared
him to Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov. 'Precisely because he feels himself to
be a rights campaigner, evidently he does not intend to stop this work. So he
should choose a country and move there,' he said according to an official
transcript of the news conference posted on the presidential site.

Shortly after Putin's comments, reports emerged that Snowden had requested
Russian asylum.

"At 22:30 Moscow time yesterday [on Sunday], UK citizen Sarah Harrison addressed
the consulate in the Sheremetyevo Airport with a request on behalf of Edward
Snowden to grant him political asylum,' Kim Shevchenko, the consulate's diplomat
on duty, was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying.

Wikileaks confirmed Tuesday that Russia was among 21 countries where Snowden had
requested asylum, including Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Ecuador, as well as India,
Italy, and Poland.

Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Radoslaw Sikorski confirmed on his Twitter that
Snowden had filed an asylum request, but wrote that 'even if it was filled out
correctly, I would not give him a positive recommendation.'

The U.S. had held 'high-level discussions with the Russians about trying to find
a solution to the problem" of Snowden's extradition, President Obama said on
Monday during an official visit to Tanzania. Earlier on Monday, Russian Security
Council head Nikolai Patrushev had said that the presidents of Russia and the
United States had instructed the heads of both countries' national security
services, the FSB and the FBI, to 'keep constant contact and search for a
possible solution,' RIA Novosti reported.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              320 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Snowden Seeks Asylum in Russia, Putting Kremlin on the Spot

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROTH and ELLEN BARRY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1120 words


MOSCOW -- The Kremlin on Monday found itself confronted with a dilemma it had
hoped to avoid, after an official revealed that Edward J. Snowden, the former
National Security Agency contractor wanted by the United States, had submitted a
request to Russia for political asylum.

Kim N. Shevchenko, the consul at Sheremetyevo airport, said that Mr. Snowden's
traveling companion hand-delivered Mr. Snowden's request late Sunday evening to
a Russian consulate in Terminal F of the airport, and that it had been passed to
the country's Foreign Ministry.

No high-level officials confirmed the report on Monday. President Vladimir V.
Putin's press secretary, Dmitri S. Peskov, said he did not know whether the
request had been submitted. ''I do not have any information,'' he said.

Mr. Putin has tried to stake out a neutral position since Mr. Snowden landed at
Sheremetyevo airport eight days ago. If he grants Mr. Snowden asylum, Mr. Putin
will inflict severe damage on Russia's relationship with the United States. If
he plays a part in his capture, he will appear to have bent to Washington's
will.

At a news conference on Monday, Mr. Putin tried to thread the needle, saying Mr.
Snowden was welcome to stay in Russia as long as he stopped publishing
classified documents that hurt the United States' interests. He went on to
acknowledge that this was unlikely to happen.

''If he wants to go somewhere and they accept him, please, be my guest,'' Mr.
Putin said. ''If he wants to stay here, there is one condition: He must cease
his work aimed at inflicting damage to our American partners, as strange as it
may sound from my lips.''

He added, ''Because he sees himself as a human-rights activist and a freedom
fighter for people's rights, apparently he is not intending to cease this work.
So he must choose for himself a country to go to, and where to move. When that
will happen, I unfortunately don't know.''

Mr. Putin's comments reflected an increasingly sober view of the outcome if Mr.
Snowden remains in Russia. For the second time, he took pains to say that Mr.
Snowden had not been recruited by Russian intelligence -- an impression that
could corrode Mr. Snowden's image as a truth-teller and drive away some
supporters.

''He sees himself not as a former agent of a special service but as a fighter
for human rights, a sort of a new dissident, someone similar to Sakharov, on a
different scale, though,'' Mr. Putin said. ''But nevertheless, at his core he is
a fighter for human rights, for democracy.'' The reference was to the Soviet
dissident Andrei Sakharov.

Eight days ago, Mr. Snowden arrived on an Aeroflot flight from Hong Kong to
Moscow, apparently intending to board a connecting flight headed for Latin
America. After that, however, the United States announced that his American
passport had been revoked, leaving him in a geopolitical limbo, stripped of any
valid identification and unable to leave Sheremetyevo's transit zone.

While Mr. Snowden remains in this suspended state, the United States has engaged
an array of countries that have considered granting him asylum, making clear
that doing so would carry big costs. Ecuador, the country that is sheltering the
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, has distanced itself, with top officials
saying that it could take as long as two months to process Mr. Snowden's asylum
request and that Russia bore most responsibility for his fate.

Mr. Putin's spokesman, meanwhile, said as recently as Sunday that Mr. Snowden's
case ''was not one on the Kremlin's agenda,'' noting that Sheremetyevo's transit
zone is legally not the part of territory of the Russian Federation.

''Snowden himself is in a pretty difficult situation,'' said Dmitri V. Trenin,
director of the Carnegie Moscow Center. ''I think he was following Assange's
advice trying to get to Ecuador, but then Ecuador, and, indirectly, Cuba, have
failed him. I think Venezuela is talking to the U.S. as well. The U.S. can offer
things to Venezuela.''

Mr. Snowden's application for asylum could make it difficult for the Kremlin to
remain neutral, especially since the case has become a primary topic for public
discussion in Russia over the last several days.

A parade of public figures -- including human rights activists, pro-Kremlin
figures, Communists, nationalists and parliamentarians -- have made statements
in favor of granting him asylum. As anchors read reports on Mr. Snowden's case
on a popular news program Monday night, a vivid blue-and-red backdrop read
''Betray Snowden -- Betray Freedom'' and showed President Obama wearing
headphones, a visual reference to the surveillance programs Mr. Snowden has
revealed.

''To be honest, I can't see any problem there,'' Ivan Melnikov, one of the
leaders of Russia's Communist Party, told Interfax. ''If the problem is
hysterics from the United States, they ought to remember that, historically
speaking, granting political asylum to figures like Snowden is normal historical
practice, and there's no reason for Russia to be embarrassed and drop out.''

At a round table on Monday, a prominent leader of United Russia, the main
pro-Kremlin party, said Mr. Snowden ''has done no less to win the Nobel Prize
than Barack Obama.'' Kirill Kabanov, a member of the presidential human rights
council, described Mr. Snowden as a man who ''tried to save the world.''

Sergei A. Markov, a pro-Kremlin analyst, said if Mr. Snowden received asylum, he
could acquire a Russian transit document and leave the country, or else remain
in the country as a public figure, which he said would be ''very good for public
relations, he will be like Gérard Depardieu.'' Mr. Depardieu, the French actor,
sought Russian citizenship to avoid taxes in his home country.

Mr. Markov said Russian leaders had spent several days weighing their options
and taking a measure of domestic public opinion. The result, he said, was ''more
or less consensus over this issue.''

As an international oil and gas forum convened here on Monday morning, analysts
speculated that Mr. Putin and President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela would use
the opportunity to negotiate terms for Mr. Snowden to leave the Russian airport.

Russia enjoys warm ties with Venezuela, a major arms customer and energy
partner, which sees the alliance as a way of countering the United States'
influence in Latin America.

The newspaper Izvestia even speculated that Mr. Maduro could spirit Mr. Snowden
away on his presidential plane when he leaves Russia on Tuesday, arranging to
take off from Sheremetyevo instead of a government facility at Vnukovo Airport.
Mr. Putin responded blankly to that theory at Monday's news conference.

''As to the possible departure of Mr. Snowden with some official delegation,''
he said, ''I know nothing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/02/world/europe/snowden
-applies-for-asylum-in-russia.html

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: ''If he wants to go somewhere and they accept him, please, be
my guest,'' Vladimir V. Putin said of Edward J. Snowden. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVAN
SEKRETAREV/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leaker Is Said To Claim U.S. Is Blocking Asylum Bids

BYLINE: By RICK GLADSTONE and WILLIAM NEUMAN; Rick Gladstone reported from New
York, and William Neuman from Quito, Ecuador.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 679 words


Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive former American security contractor, appeared to
break his silence on Monday for the first time since he flew to Moscow eight
days earlier. WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy group, issued a statement attributed
to him that denounced President Obama for revoking his passport, opposing his
asylum requests and leaving him a ''stateless person.''

The statement posted on the Web site of WikiLeaks, which has been assisting Mr.
Snowden, accused Mr. Obama and the United States government of seeking to
intimidate him and deceive the world because of his disclosures about the vast
global surveillance efforts of American intelligence agencies.

The statement attributed to Mr. Snowden cited Mr. Obama's assertion last week
that he would not permit any diplomatic ''wheeling and dealing'' with other
countries that may wish to grant him asylum. But, it said, Vice President Joseph
R. Biden Jr. has been pressuring ''the leaders of nations from which I have
requested protection to deny my asylum petitions.''

Mr. Biden telephoned President Rafael Correa of Ecuador last week and asked him
not to grant Mr. Snowden asylum, Mr. Correa said Saturday.

''The Obama administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as
a weapon,'' the statement attributed to Mr. Snowden said. ''Although I am
convicted of nothing, it has unilaterally revoked my passport, leaving me a
stateless person. Without any judicial order, the administration now seeks to
stop me exercising a basic right. A right that belongs to everybody. The right
to seek asylum.''

A later post, which appeared early Tuesday on the WikiLeaks Web site, said that
Sarah Harrison, the group's legal adviser in the Snowden matter, had ''submitted
by hand a number of requests for asylum and asylum assistance on behalf'' of Mr.
Snowden to 19 countries. They were listed as Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, China,
Cuba, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Russia, Spain, Switzerland and Venezuela.

The post said the requests, which ''outline the risks of persecution Mr. Snowden
faces in the United States,'' were delivered to an official at the Russian
Consulate at the Moscow airport where, according to Russian officials, Mr.
Snowden is ensconced in an international transit lounge, trying to determine his
next step, and has technically not entered Russian territory. It said the
consulate had started delivering the requests to the relevant embassies in
Moscow.

The statement on Monday attributed to Mr. Snowden appeared to be the first
direct word from him about his predicament since his flight to Moscow from Hong
Kong on June 23 despite an American request to the Hong Kong authorities to
arrest Mr. Snowden, who is accused of violating espionage laws. His disclosures
have embarrassed the Obama administration and caused tensions with other
countries, including China, Russia and European Union members.

Mr. Snowden, 30, has still not been publicly seen in Russia, and there was no
way to immediately verify that he had made the statement attributed to him.

Mr. Snowden's case appeared to be causing tensions between the government of
Ecuador and Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder. Mr. Assange has been in
Ecuador's embassy in London for more than a year, given asylum there to avoid
extradition to Sweden, where he is wanted for questioning on allegations that he
sexually assaulted two women.

''The conduct of Assange has bothered me a little, and this morning I spoke with
the foreign minister to tell him not to speak about our country's situations,''
Mr. Correa said Monday, according to Agence France-Presse.

Mr. Correa was apparently displeased by comments that Mr. Assange made on Sunday
on the ABC program ''This Week'' regarding Mr. Biden's telephone call. Mr.
Assange characterized that call as an effort to pressure Mr. Correa. ''What does
he know about the call from Joe Biden?'' Mr. Correa was quoted as saying by
A.F.P. ''And he says that he called to pressure me. I have never permitted a
call to put pressure on me.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/02/world/europe/snowden
-speaks-out-in-moscow-for-first-time.html

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

THE HAPLESS LEAKER WHO CAME TO DINNER

BYLINE: DANIEL RUTH

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 719 words


Over the course of a few short weeks, Edward Snowden has transformed himself
from an international man of cloak-and-dagger intrigue, single-handedly exposing
the innermost workings of the National Security Agency, to the hapless leaker
who came to dinner.

It was just a hint that Snowden's fortunes were about to take a turn for the
worse when Ecuador started having second thoughts about granting asylum to a
very much wanted man by the United States. That pretty much leaves Brigadoon,
the Grand Duchy of Fenwick, Freedonia and a Potemkin village as options for the
de facto stateless Snowden. He may well be ruing his decision to hop a flight
out of Hong Kong when he might have managed to seek solace in the humanitarian
arms of the Chinese.

Then again, to paraphrase Humphrey Bogart: Snowden will always have that bastion
of paradise, North Korea. But first he has to get there.

At last report Snowden was stuck at the Novotel hotel on the grounds of Moscow's
Sheremetyevo International Airport. Passengers arriving at Sheremetyevo with
visa problems, or with a voided U.S. passport as was the case with Snowden, are
consigned to the Novotel until the paperwork gets cleared up or they die from
bureaucratic inertia. The Bates Motel, even with its problematic shower
accommodations, is a five-star resort experience compared to the Novotel where,
according to the Associated Press, a bottle of red wine can run a "guest" $165
and miniature shot of Hennessy cognac can set one back $80.

It's a toss-up whether Snowden runs out of money before he runs out of friends.

Perhaps Snowden thought he had a pal in Russian President Vladimir Putin, or a
compadre in Ecuadorian strongman Rafael Correa. But both men have begun to
regard the world's most famous leaker since Judas as the obnoxious
brother-in-law who unexpectedly shows up for Thanksgiving and drinks all the
liquor.

Putin has insisted he is powerless to help Snowden leave the airport since it
isn't really considered Russian soil. This from a head of state and former KGB
operative, who as president is widely believed to have ordered the
assassinations of expatriate dissidents living in foreign countries. Too bad
these victims didn't seek sanctuary at the Sheremetyevo airport where they would
have been protected.

It's entirely possible Snowden isn't at the airport but is being hosted by the
Russian Federal Security Service. Perhaps the Russians could learn more about
the contents of the fugitive's laptops, which might contain evidence the United
States snooped on everyone from German Chancellor Angela Merkel to the Campfire
Girls.

At first Correa seemed more than happy to welcome Snowden. Then it was suggested
that since Ecuador received $144 million in U.S. aid, not to mention
exporting$9.5 billion in goods to the United States, he might want to think
twice about harboring Snowden. A government official huffed his country "does
not accept threats from anybody, and does not trade in principles, or submit to
mercantile interests, as important as they may be."

But that was before Vice President Joe Biden put a call into Correa. Nobody is
saying much about what was discussed, but it is possible Biden casually
observed: "You know Rafael, that's an awfully nice trade agreement you have
there. It would be a shame if anything happened to it."

Because it was right about then that the principled Correa noted as much as he
would love to help Snowden, he, too, is powerless since Ecuador can't issue a
visa unless the man on the run can make it to an Ecuadorian embassy. And since
Snowden can't leave Sheremetyevo without his passport, because the airport is
the make-believe sovereign soil of Balderdashabad, poor Putin also is powerless
to intervene.

You don't need to be John le Carre to figure out while Snowden may have pulled
off a massive theft of secret stuff, the United States still has the juice to
make his current situation a living hell - with lousy room service.

It's possible Snowden will conclude he would rather share a cell with the
Unabomber at the federal supermax prison in Colorado than spend another day
panhandling rubles for a bar of soap.

Then, as if by magic, all the appropriate passports and visas for a trip back to
the United States suddenly will materialize.

And that will be the end of "From Russia, With a Warrant."

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: At last report, Edward Snowden was stuck at the Novotel hotel on
the grounds of Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              323 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 thetimes.co.uk

                        July 2, 2013 Tuesday 6:42 PM GMT

Edward Snowden's options narrow as countries rule out asylum

BYLINE: Jenny Booth

SECTION: EUROPE

LENGTH: 1105 words


Edward Snowden's chances of escaping US justice were narrowing today as the
American leaker withdrew his request for political asylum in Russia and was
turned down for sanctuary in at least ten other countries.

Dmitry Peskov, President Putin's press secretary, said that Mr Snowden withdrew
his Russian request in response to Mr Putin's comments last night that to be
welcome to stay he would first have to stop leaking US intelligence data.

Today Mr Snowden remained in the transit area of Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow,
where he has been stranded for nine days. He has not crossed through passport
control on to Russian territory.

"He abandoned his intention and his request to receive the chance of staying in
Russia," Mr Peskov said this morning.

Yesterday Mr Putin said that Mr Snowden, who has been on the run for a month
since leaking details of America's secret Prism surveillance programme, was
welcome to stay in Russia as long as he stopped "harming our American partners".

Mr Snowden applied for asylum in Russia on Sunday night, one of 21 asylum
requests the former US National Security Agency IT contractor has made in an
increasingly desperate attempt to stay beyond the reach of US justice.

WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy website whose employee Sarah Harrison is travelling
with Mr Snowden, says that he has applied to France, Germany, Austria, Italy,
Spain, Poland, Switzerland, Ireland, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, Bolivia,
Brazil, China, Cuba, India, Nicaragua and Venezuela, among others.

Frode Andersen, the Norwegian foreign ministry spokesman, confirmed that Mr
Snowden's asylum application was received by fax to Norway's Embassy in Moscow
late yesterday afternoon. "It is probably from him and it is allegedly signed by
him, but we have no way of checking that," he said.

This morning Poland was the first in a growing list of countries to reveal that
it has ruled his asylum request to be ineligible.

"We received a document that does not meet the requirements for a formal
application for asylum," Radoslaw Sikorski, the Polish Foreign Minister, wrote
on his Twitter account. "Even if it did, I will not give a positive
recommendation."

Mr Snowden's options appeared to narrow further as officials in Ireland, Spain,
Germany, Norway, Austria, Finland and Switzerland each later said that he cannot
apply for asylum unless he is already on their soil.

India said that it was rejecting Mr Snowden. "We have carefully examined the
request. Following that examination we have concluded that we see no reason to
accede to the request," said Syed Akbaruddin, an Indian foreign ministry
spokesman.

In a marked change of tone, even President Correa of Ecuador - a country which
ten days ago appeared so sympathetic to Mr Snowden that it issued him with
temporary travel documents when his US passport was cancelled - said that giving
the whistleblower a travel pass to fly to Moscow from Hong Kong had been "a
mistake on our part".

He too said that his country could not consider an asylum request unless Mr
Snowden was on Ecuadorean territory.

"Are we responsible for getting him to Ecuador? It's not logical," Mr Correa
told the Guardian, adding that Snowden was now Moscow's problem.

WikiLeaks said that Mr Snowden's asylum requests were delivered to a Russian
consular official at the airport, together with his request for asylum in
Russia. Mr Peskov claimed that in fact Mr Snowden had issued only 15 asylum
requests.

One ray of hope for Mr Snowden this morning came from Nicolas Maduro, the
Venezuelan President, who voiced sympathy for his plight - while appearing
unaware that Mr Snowden had allegedly asked for asylum in his country.

"He deserves the world's protection," Mr Maduro told reporters on an official
visit to Moscow. "He has not asked us for it yet. When he does we will give our
answer,"

Yesterday Mr Snowden broke his silence for the first time since he fled from
Hong Kong to Moscow nine days ago, saying that he remains free to make new
disclosures about US spying activities.

On the day he applied for asylum in Russia, he wrote in a letter to the
Ecuadorean Government: "I remain free to publish information that serves the
public interest."

He complained that the US Government was illegally pursuing him "with an
extra-judicial manhunt costing me my family, my freedom to travel and my right
to live peacefully without fear of illegal aggression".

"The Obama administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a
weapon," he said in a statement. "Although I am convicted of nothing, it has
unilaterally revoked my passport, leaving me a stateless person.

"Without any judicial order, the administration now seeks stop me exercising a
basic right. A right that belongs to everybody. The right to seek asylum.

"In the end the Obama administration is not afraid of whistleblowers like me,
Bradley Manning or Thomas Drake. We are stateless, imprisoned or powerless. No,
the Obama administration is afraid of you. It is afraid of an informed, angry
public demanding the constitutional government it was promised - and it should
be."

A US State Department spokesman declined to predict how America would respond
were Mr Snowden to be granted asylum: "We're not at that point right now. We're
going to make our case about what we think needs to happen, and we hope they do
the right thing."

The spokesman denied that Mr Snowden was now legally "marooned" in Moscow,
saying: "He's still enjoys the rights of his US citizenship, which include the
right to free and fair trial for the crimes he has been accused of."

He said that the former NSA contract employee could be issued with a one-entry
travel document to the US.

The repercussions of Mr Snowden's actions continue to reverberate around the
world. In Germany, Angela Merkel's spokeswoman warned President Obama that "we
are not in the Cold War any more" in response to national uproar over the
apparent extent of NSA operations in Germany as revealed by Der Spiegel
magazine.

The leader of the opposition Green Party called for the country to offer Mr
Snowden sanctuary rather than let him to "hunker down with despots".

In France, President Hollande has threatened to freeze negotiations on a
landmark US-EU free trade pact because of new claims that the US is spying on EU
offices and communications across Europe.

Mr Obama, on his state visit to Tanzania, tried to mollify European leaders by
emphasising that his personal relationships with them were more important than
surveillance. While stopping short of acknowledging any spying by the US, he
suggested that all parties systematically snoop on either other.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTTO


                     Copyright 2013 News International Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              325 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                 thetimes.co.uk

                       July 2, 2013 Tuesday 10:39 AM GMT

Edward Snowden withdraws request for asylum in Russia

BYLINE: Jenny Booth

SECTION: EUROPE

LENGTH: 1074 words


Edward Snowden's chances of escaping US justice were narrowing today as the
American leaker withdrew his request for political asylum in Russia and learned
that he was not eligible for asylum in Ecuador nor five European countries.

Dmitry Peskov, President Putin's press secretary, said that Mr Snowden withdrew
his Russian request in response to Mr Putin's comments last night that he would
first have to stop leaking US intelligence data.

Today Mr Snowden remained in the transit area of Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow,
where he has been stranded for nine days. He has not crossed through passport
control on to Russian territory.

Yesterday Mr Putin said that Mr Snowden, who has been on the run for a month
since leaking details of America's secret Prism surveillance programme, was
welcome to stay in Russia as long as he stopped "harming our American partners".

"He abandoned his intention and his request to receive the chance of staying in
Russia," Mr Peskov said this morning.

Mr Snowden applied for asylum in Russia on Sunday night, one of 21 asylum
requests the former US National Security Agency IT contractor has made in an
increasingly desperate attempt to stay beyond the reach of US justice.

This morning Poland revealed that it has rejected his asylum request.

"We received a document that does not meet the requirements for a formal
application for asylum," Radoslaw Sikorski, the Polish Foreign Minister, wrote
on his Twitter account. "Even if it did, I will not give a positive
recommendation."

Mr Snowden's options appeared to narrow further as officials in Germany, Norway,
Austria and Switzerland each said that he cannot apply for asylum from another
country.

Frode Andersen, the Norwegian foreign ministry spokesman, said that Mr Snowden's
asylum application was received by fax to Norway's Embassy in Moscow late
yesterday afternoon. "It is probably from him and it is allegedly signed by him,
but we have no way of checking that," he said.

In a marked change of tone, President Correa of Ecuador - a country which ten
days ago appeared so sympathetic to Mr Snowden that it issued him with temporary
travel documents when his US passport was cancelled - said that giving the
whistleblower a travel pass to fly to Moscow from Hong Kong had been "a mistake
on our part".

He too said that his country could not consider an asylum request unless Mr
Snowden was on Ecuadorean territory.

"Are we responsible for getting him to Ecuador? It's not logical," Mr Correa
told the Guardian, adding that Snowden was now Moscow's problem.

WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy website whose employee Sarah Harrison is travelling
with Mr Snowden, says that he has asked for asylum in France, Germany, Austria,
Italy, Spain, Switzerland and Ireland together with Finland, the Netherlands and
Norway. Other countries approached include Bolivia, Brazil, China, Cuba, India,
Nicaragua, Poland and Venezuela.

Many European countries require an asylum request to be made on their own soil.
Mr Peskov claimed that in fact Mr Snowden had issued only 15 asylum requests.

One ray of hope for Mr Snowden this morning came from Nicolas Maduro, the
Venezuelan President, who voiced sympathy for his plight - while appearing
unaware that Mr Snowden had allegedly asked for asylum in his country.

"He deserves the world's protection," Mr Maduro told reporters on an official
visit to Moscow. "He has not asked us for it yet. When he does we will give our
answer,"

Yesterday Mr Snowden broke his silence for the first time since he fled from
Hong Kong to Moscow nine days ago, saying that he remains free to make new
disclosures about US spying activities.

On the day he applied for asylum in Russia, he wrote in a letter to the
Ecuadorean Government: "I remain free to publish information that serves the
public interest."

He complained that the US Government was illegally pursuing him "with an
extra-judicial manhunt costing me my family, my freedom to travel and my right
to live peacefully without fear of illegal aggression".

"The Obama administration has now adopted the strategy of using citizenship as a
weapon," he said in a statement. "Although I am convicted of nothing, it has
unilaterally revoked my passport, leaving me a stateless person.

"Without any judicial order, the administration now seeks stop me exercising a
basic right. A right that belongs to everybody. The right to seek asylum.

"In the end the Obama administration is not afraid of whistleblowers like me,
Bradley Manning or Thomas Drake. We are stateless, imprisoned or powerless. No,
the Obama administration is afraid of you. It is afraid of an informed, angry
public demanding the constitutional government it was promised - and it should
be."

A US State Department spokesman declined to predict how America would respond
were Mr Snowden to be granted asylum: "We're not at that point right now. We're
going to make our case about what we think needs to happen, and we hope they do
the right thing."

Responding to assertions that Mr Snowden was now legally "marooned" in Moscow,
the spokesman denied the accusation saying: "He's still enjoys the rights of his
US citizenship, which include the right to free and fair trial for the crimes he
has been accused of."

He said that the former NSA contract employee could be issued with a one-entry
travel document to the US.

WikiLeaks said that Mr Snowden's asylum requests were delivered to a Russian
consular official at the airport, together with his request for asylum in
Russia.

The repercussions of Mr Snowden's actions continue to reverberate around the
world. In Germany, Angela Merkel's spokeswoman warned President Obama that "we
are not in the Cold War any more" in response to national uproar over the
apparent extent of NSA operations in Germany as revealed by Der Spiegel
magazine.

The leader of the opposition Green Party called for the country to offer Mr
Snowden sanctuary rather than let him to "hunker down with despots".

In France, President Hollande has threatened to freeze negotiations on a
landmark US-EU free trade pact because of new claims that the US is spying on EU
offices and communications across Europe.

Mr Obama, on his state visit to Tanzania, tried to mollify European leaders by
emphasising that his personal relationships with them were more important than
surveillance. While stopping short of acknowledging any spying by the US, he
suggested that all parties systematically snoop on either other.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTTO


                     Copyright 2013 News International Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              326 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Russia invites Snowden, on one condition;
He must stop leaking NSA secrets if he wants asylum, Putin says

BYLINE: Kim Hjelmgaard, and Aaron Tilton, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 524 words


Russian President Vladimir Putin said Monday that former National Security
Agency contractor Edward Snowden would have to stop leaking U.S. secrets if he
wanted to be granted asylum in Russia, where Snowden has been hiding out for
eight days.

Putin insisted that Russia is not going to extradite Snowden to the United
States, refusing a demand from President Obama that he be handed over to the USA
to face charges of espionage.

"There is one condition if he wants to remain here: He must stop his work aimed
at damaging our American partners. As odd as it may sound coming from me," Putin
told a news conference in Moscow.

"Russia has never extradited anyone and is not going to do so," Putin said,
adding that Snowden "should choose his final destination and go there."

Snowden released a statement Monday through the website WikiLeaks critical of
Obama for asking Russia to send him back after he said the president vowed not
to engage in "wheeling and dealing" over his return.

"This kind of deception from a world leader is not justice, and neither is the
extralegal penalty of exile," stated Snowden, whose U.S. passport has been
revoked. "These are the old, bad tools of political aggression. Their purpose is
to frighten, not me, but those who would come after me."

Obama said last week that he would not offer special inducements to other
nations over a routine matter of law enforcement that should be honored as part
of international law.

The president has said the NSA secret surveillance programs that Snowden made
public are legal and proper, aimed only at disrupting terrorist plots.

Snowden insisted Monday that he is a whistle-blower who should be allowed to go
where he pleases and compared himself to Army Pvt. Bradley Manning, who is being
court-martialed for sending secret diplomatic communications on Iraq and
Afghanistan to WikiLeaks.

The 30-year-old Snowden still appears to be holed up in Moscow's Sheremetyevo
Airport, where he landed after fleeing Hong Kong. Interfax news agency quoted
consular desk official Kim Shevchenko as saying that British citizen Sarah
Harrison -- an aide to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange -- asked the Russian
Foreign Ministry on Monday to grant Snowden political asylum.

The reported request comes after Ecuador hedged on whether it would grant
Snowden protection as it has Assange, who is hiding out in the Ecuadorean
Embassy in London to avoid extradition to Sweden on rape charges. The Los
Angeles Times reported Monday that Snowden had given Russian diplomats a list of
15 countries to which he would like to apply for political asylum.

Meanwhile, the office of Germany's federal prosecutor said it is launching a
preliminary inquiry into allegations from Snowden that U.S. intelligence
agencies tapped European communication channels.

German news weekly Der Spiegel set off a diplomatic row when it reported that
the NSA had bugged European Union offices in Washington, New York and Brussels.

The report cited secret U.S. documents allegedly obtained by Snowden before he
fled the United States.

Germany said it planned to call in the U.S. ambassador for an explanation over
the "breach in trust."

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Ivan Sekretarev, AP Russian President Vladimir Putin, speaking
Monday from the Kremlin, insisted that Russia wouldn't extradite Edward Snowden
to the United States.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              327 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Snowden, left stranded, seeks asylum in Russia

BYLINE: Kathy Lally

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW - Fugitive Edward Snowden has asked Russia for political asylum,
according to a consular official who spoke out after President Vladimir Putin
said Monday that such a request might be considered if Snowden refrained from
releasing harmful information about the United States on Russian soil.

Putin's suggestion that Russia might seek to impose some constraints on the
former National Security Agency contractor was an unusual gesture from a foreign
leader who has been a strong critic of the United States. But any offer of
asylum from Russia would defy Washington's requests that Snowden be returned to
the United States.

The unexpected talk of Russian asylum added urgency to the question of Snowden's
fate, after eight days in which he has been stranded in a Moscow airport with a
revoked U.S. passport that left him unable to leave and seek asylum elsewhere.

In a statement issued late Monday by the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks, Snowden
assailed the Obama administration for tactics that he said had left him "a
stateless person." He made no mention of his asylum application.

The fallout from Snowden's disclosures continued to plague President Obama, who
was forced to defend U.S. intelligence gathering while traveling in Tanzania on
Monday, after weekend reports that European allies were among the targets of
covert surveillance programs.

Snowden, who has been seeking refuge in Ecuador, faces charges in the United
States for disclosing details of U.S. surveillance programs. Russia has refused
to turn him over, in a demonstration of its unwillingness to bow to U.S.
desires.

But at a time of ever more tense relations between the countries, Russia has
avoided being too provocative and has sidestepped the asylum issue.

Although Putin did not try to deepen the U.S. embarrassment on Monday, he laid
out detailed conditions for Snowden's possible asylum in Russia in a way that
made it unclear whether he was seriously considering such an offer or was making
an opening bid in negotiations with the United States over Snowden's future.

"If he wants to stay here," Putin said, "there is one condition: He has to stop
his work undermining our U.S. partners, as odd as it may sound coming from me."

Shrinking options

Even a tentative Russian embrace of the former government contractor hardly
seemed a possibility after Snowden left Hong Kong bound for Ecuador by way of
Moscow and Havana. Russia has a poor reputation among its citizens for
protection of free speech and human rights.

But by Monday, it had become increasingly clear that Snowden had few other
options.

Although the leftist government in Ecuador praised Snowden early last week and
had been defiant toward Washington, President Rafael Correa's position subtly
shifted by Friday. That was when Vice President Biden called to ask that Ecuador
return Snowden to the United States should he arrive in the South American
country.

The conversation was "very cordial," Correa told state radio on Monday. But he
said Biden also told him that bilateral relations would "strongly deteriorate"
should Snowden receive asylum. Speaking before it was known that Snowden had
asked Russia for asylum, Correa said Biden's point was "an argument, a factor"
that his country would consider if Snowden were to officially petition Ecuador
for asylum.

Another possible option for Snowden was Venezuela, whose president, NicolÃ¡s
Maduro, was in Moscow on Monday, leading to speculation that Snowden could leave
with him on his official plane.

Perhaps as his options narrowed, Russia seemed the last resort for Snowden,
according to Mark Galeotti, an expert on Russia and its security agencies at New
York University.

"If they had wanted to, they could have given him some kind of pass and put him
on a plane," Galeotti said, but as Ecuador's doubts about accepting Snowden
increased, Russia took full advantage.

Request for asylum

On Monday evening, Kim Shevchenko, the consular officer on duty in the transit
zone at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport, said Snowden had applied
for asylum Sunday night.

The request was delivered by Sarah Harrison, a top WikiLeaks lieutenant who
accompanied Snowden to Moscow from Hong Kong, and was sent on to the Foreign
Ministry for consideration, Shevchenko said. Kremlin officials said they could
offer no comment.

Although Putin spoke as if he knew nothing about the request, it appeared
unlikely that he could have been unaware of Snowden's application.

And as the story became more and more like a spy novel, the clues offered by
Putin, a former KGB officer,  tantalized. As he was wrapping up a forum of 11
gas-producing countries, with the presidents of Iran and Venezuela in
attendance, the Russian president said at a news conference that Snowden could
stay if he refrained from what Putin called his human rights activity.

That might prove difficult for Snowden, Putin said, so he needs to choose a
country willing to tolerate his work and move there. "When this will happen,"
Putin said, "I do not know, unfortunately."

Russia has no extradition treaty with the United States, and it refuses to
extradite its own citizens, though, as Putin pointed out Monday, there have been
exchanges of accused spies. "Russia never extradites anyone anywhere," he said,
"and is not going to extradite anyone." He also repeated his assertion that
Snowden was not turning over information in his possession to Russia operatives.

Galeotti said he thought Russia was reluctant to keep Snowden forever and may
instead consider him a bargaining chip.

Russia badly wants the return of Viktor Bout, a convicted arms smuggler
sentenced to 25 years in prison in New York last year. Galeotti suspects that
Bout had ties to Russian intelligence. "Like the Soviets, the Russians are
determined to get their people home," he said, and they may see Snowden as a way
to do that.

Since Snowden turned up here - remaining unseen - Russian officials have avoided
gloating about how he has eluded American officials and damaged U.S. security.
Neither have they gone out of their way to be helpful by expelling Snowden.

Putin has made needling the United States a favored pastime - he accuses it of
meddling in Russia's domestic affairs and propping up political opposition with
U.S. support for democracy and human rights. At the same time, Putin has been
eager to have Obama visit Russia for a summit, which the U.S. president has
promised to do in conjunction with the Group of 20 meeting in St. Petersburg in
September. Harboring Snowden could threaten the presidential meeting.

kathy.lally@washpost.com

David Nakamura in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Juan Forero in Bogota, Colombia,
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              328 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                              The Washington Times

                              July 2, 2013 Tuesday

Father of NSA leaker goes from anguish to disillusion;
Says he's lost faith in nation's leaders

BYLINE: By Ralph Z. Hallow THE WASHINGTON TIMES

SECTION: A, PAGE ONE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1760 words


Lon Snowden's anguish over his son, Edward Snowden, is turning into something
else he didn't expect: disillusion with a government he once proudly served.

"I'm an American citizen who has lost faith in many of the leaders on both sides
of the political aisle," Mr. Snowden said during an interview with The
Washington Times.

A decorated Coast Guard officer, the elder Mr. Snowden says he, like his son,
once "walked the halls of the National Security Agency." He is disappointed with
his son's betrayal of his oath of secrecy as an NSA contractor and concerned
that his son may spend his life in prison.

Yet now, just a few weeks after demanding his son's return home to face
punishment, he is increasingly ambivalent about the younger Mr. Snowden's
disclosure of some of the government's most prized secrets about its global
surveillance activities.

"If my son was exposed to information that made him believe that the U.S.
Constitution was being violated, then the unauthorized release of classified
information is certainly not unconstitutional, and the Constitution is the
highest law of the land," Mr. Snowden said.

Each day brings another revelation in the family's saga. On Monday, the younger
Mr. Snowden revealed he is seeking asylum in Russia and issued a statement
accusing President Obama of employing "old, bad tools of political aggression"
to force his return to the United States to face felony criminal charges.

A family in crisis

The swirl of feelings is tearing Lon Snowden apart emotionally, and the cost of
hiring attorneys to help his son threatens to wreck the family financially as
well.

"My son has made his own bed," Mr. Snowden said Friday in one of a series of
interviews with The Times over several days. "I have three other children to
worry about. You won't believe what these attorneys wanted in money from me just
to see what is possible with the government."

Now retired from the military and living in Pennsylvania, Lon Snowden told The
Times that his son had begged him in an email Thursday not to talk to the press,
warning that doing so would further jeopardize his situation.

Nonetheless, Mr. Snowden, at the behest of one of his attorneys, Bruce Fein, did
a TV interview Friday during which he said he was shocked to see that the
reporter had a copy of a letter Mr. Fein had sent to Attorney General Eric H.
Holder Jr. laying out conditions for Edward Snowden's return to the U.S.: no
confinement until trial in a place of his choosing and no gag order.

Such negotiations with the government are normally conducted in complete
privacy. The elder Mr. Snowden said he wasn't pleased by the release of the
letter.

Mr. Snowden expressed in several phone conversations his continuing anger over
his son's stealing and publishing of top government secrets, and his fleeing to
China, then Russia, rather than accepting the legal consequences of what Edward
Snowden's defenders call whistleblowing.

"I have lost a son as a result of this. He's gone. I'm probably never going to
see him again. That's where I am," the father said.

In formal interviews, phone calls and email and text messages, Lon Snowden also
made clear that he loves his country.

But the father also sees, through the prism of time, the erosion of trust and
faith in a government that he regards as having gone awry, with no one out there
to right its course. In hours of interviews, he described an unmistakably
calloused political world where elections change nothing and "where the only
sure winner is Goldman Sachs."

A country astray?

In Lon Snowden's view of the world, political movements only rearrange the deck
chairs on the Titanic, and political resumes are built by officials who spend
years as government drones, then become world celebrities with titles such as
secretary or director with perks and staffs of which the kings of Europe could
only dream. In the end, they retire to the private sector to earn millions of
dollars, often working for the very contractors they once oversaw.

"That they get away with this always amazed me," Lon Snowden said.

Such disillusionment extends beyond the Snowden family. A CNN poll released
Monday found that 44 percent of Americans approved of Edward Snowden's
disclosure of the government's massive surveillance of ordinary Americans, while
6 percent approved of Congress.

Mr. Snowden said he believes his son was wrong, on moral principle, to reveal
top government secrets, but is also coming to grips with what he sees as the
beginnings of a "Big Brother is watching you" America that his son laid bare in
a series of leaks.

Edward Snowden was a U.S. intelligence officer with a top-secret clearance when
he worked for five years at Dell Computers in its Washington, D.C., offices. He
was handling top-secret data at the Hawaii offices of another government
contractor, Booz Allen Hamilton, when he made off with top-secret evidence of
the U.S. government's gathering and storing of data on the private phone calls
and Internet contacts of hundreds of millions of Americans through programs such
as Prism.

Edward Snowden claimed that the information he stole shows the government
required Verizon, Sprint, AT&T, Apple, Google, Yahoo and other companies to turn
over all records of every customer in the United States.

About 250 million adults in America own cellphones and use the Internet.

Lon Snowden now understands how impenetrable the obstacles were that his son and
others faced in their effort to legally reveal the extent of their government's
information-gathering. A handful of Democrats and Republicans have tried for
years to get the attention of the rest of Congress, the press and the public.
But these lawmakers have said they were legally bound not to reveal the details
of the intelligence excesses they know about as overseers of those programs.

What has come to anger Lon Snowden the most is watching on television the
interrogation of top U.S. intelligence officials by the same lawmakers charged
with making sure those intelligence officials respect individual privacy.

"There's a conflict of interest between the military and civilian intelligence
community heads and the members of Congress who oversee them - the members of
the House Select Intelligence Committee," Mr. Snowden said.

The ideological divide

The saga has created divisions within political parties as well.

Conservative Republicans such as Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky and Sen. Ted Cruz of
Texas, who say Edward Snowden may have done a service to the nation, are pitted
against the GOP's leading neoconservatives such as former Vice President Dick
Cheney and former U.N. Ambassador John R. Bolton, who have called him a traitor.

"If it is the case that the federal government is seizing millions of personal
records about law-abiding citizens, and if it is the case that there are minimal
restrictions on accessing or reviewing those records, then I think Mr. Snowden
has done a considerable public service by bringing it to light," Mr. Cruz said.

In March, Sen. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat and member of the Senate Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence, asked Director of National Intelligence James
R. Clapper, "Does the NSA collect any type of data at all on millions or
hundreds of millions of Americans?"

Mr. Clapper answered, "No ... not wittingly."

By June, Mr. Clapper had changed his tune, admitting that the NSA does collect
phone-call data on millions of Americans.

Mr. Paul sees a big difference between what Mr. Snowden and Mr. Clapper did.

"Mr. Snowden hasn't lied to anyone," Mr. Paul said. "He did break his oath of
office, but part of his oath of office is to the Constitution, and he believes
that when James Clapper lied, that [Edward Snowden] was simply coming forward
and telling the truth - that your government was lying."

Lon Snowden calls Mr. Clapper "a liar."

"He is not just another guy who heads one of our intelligence organizations. He
chairs the Joint Intelligence Community Council, whose members include the
secretaries of state, Treasury, defense, the attorney general, the secretary of
energy and homeland security - and anyone else the president desires," Mr.
Snowden said.

Some Republicans share the elder Mr. Snowden's views and want Mr. Clapper
removed.

"It now appears clear that the director of national intelligence, James Clapper,
lied under oath to Congress and the American people," said Rep. Justin Amash,
Michigan Republican. "Congress can't make informed decisions on intelligence
issues when the head of the intelligence community willfully makes false
statements. Perjury is a serious crime. Mr. Clapper should resign immediately."

Mr. Clapper has denied wrongdoing, saying his earlier answer was the "least
untruthful" he could give because the surveillance programs were still
classified.

The last straw

Lon Snowden believes Mr. Clapper's answer could have been a tipping point for
his son, who he says has an IQ above 140.

"Ed's seeing his agency's chief executive officer, James Clapper, sit in front
of Congress and lie to the Senate, and couple that with the clear abuses by the
IRS and I have to believe that was his tipping point," Mr. Snowden said.

"This isn't a dark, moody kid. This is a deep thinker who has an incredible
sense of humor."

Lon Snowden said he has watched official misconduct go unpunished many times
over his military intelligence career, but Mr. Clapper's denials sent him over
the edge as well.

"That moment, I just thought this is too much," he said. "This is unbelievable.
Heads should roll, and they should roll immediately."

A retired Coast Guard officer who specialized in "system technology," Mr.
Snowden was close-lipped about what intelligence agency association he may have
had, acknowledging only that he "walked the halls of the NSA with a security
clearance but one "not at the high level my son had."

"I was a classified material control officer at one time," he said. "I reviewed
classified information and determined what should be passed along to very senior
people."

Now an anguished father, Lon Snowden simply wants the safe return of his son to
the United States to face a fair trial. But he wonders aloud whether the
government wants the same.

"What I would like is for my son to return and be tried based on the facts," he
said. "But there are members of Congress, of the intelligence oversight
committees, who don't want that to happen because if he is shown to be right,
they are shown to be wrong.

"So it may be difficult for him to get a fair trial unless we have a government
that applies the rule of law fairly in concert with the United States
Constitution."

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 The Washington Times LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              329 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                              July 1, 2013 Monday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

`Insurance' back-up an intelligence worry

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 479  words


HONG KONG: Rogue US intelligence contractor Edward Snowden left a back-up copy
of his trove of secret data in Hong Kong as an ``insurance policy'' that could
have devastating consequences for Western security interests, say sources
familiar with his time in the Chinese city.

Mr Snowden travelled to the former British colony in May with data he had
downloaded from National Security Agency computers. He was allowed to fly to
Moscow on June 23 and has remained there in limbo, apparently in an airport
transit area.

People familiar with Mr Snowden's stay in Hong Kong hint he did not carry his
four laptops to the airport on June 23, or, if he did, encrypted copies of the
contents are locked in a safe or a bank vault.

The public face of Mr Snowden's legal team, which negotiated his flight from
Hong Kong, was Albert Ho, a veteran of civil rights. Mr Ho said Mr Snowden
believed he had found sanctuary in Hong Kong.

Lawyers met Mr Snowden at a safe house on June 18. ``I went to a shop and bought
a big pizza, and several pieces of fried chicken and some sausages, some cakes
and some Pepsis and other soft drinks,'' Mr Ho recalled. On their arrival, Mr
Snowden indicated the fridge, where he insisted his visitors placed their mobile
phones to avoid surveillance.

Mr Ho said Mr Snowden had a good analytical mind and knew he faced a long
struggle with the US legal system, but he had not grasped he might be detained
in Hong Kong during the extradition battle, which could take years, and would
therefore lose access to his computers.

Mr Snowden asked Mr Ho to find out whether he would be allowed free passage to
leave Hong Kong. Mr Ho sought out officials from the Hong Kong government on
June 21 and was puzzled when they refused to respond to queries.

The reason was that China, which controls Hong Kong's foreign affairs, had
reaped its propaganda gains and now wanted Mr Snowden off its hands. Between
Friday afternoon and Saturday morning, an emissary of the Hong Kong authorities
contacted Mr Snowden: he would be free to go -- but go he must.

The Hong Kong Justice Department had, to its relief, discovered clerical errors
in the papers from the US seeking Mr Snowden's extradition on espionage charges.
Justice Minister Yuen Kwok-keung said the documents gave Mr Snowden's middle
name as James rather than Joseph and failed to confirm his passport number.
There was, he said: ``No legal basis to ask the court to issue a warrant for his
provisional arrest.''

Early on June 23, a lawyer escorted Mr Snowden to the terminal. As they checked
in for the Aeroflot flight to Moscow, the lawyer sensed that men in plain
clothes were watching.

Mr Snowden passed a security check and presented his US passport, which
Washington said it had revoked, to the immigration officer. It was stamped and
he vanished. Now, he has disappeared, having first taken care to encrypt his own
legacy.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              332 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                              July 1, 2013 Monday

Biden asks Ecuador leader to deny Snowden asylum

BYLINE: WILLIAM NEUMAN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: QUITO

ABSTRACT

President Rafael Correa, in his weekly television broadcast, said that he had
had a "cordial" talk with the U.S. vice president but that he could not yet
decide on Edward J. Snowden's request.

FULL TEXT

President Rafael Correa of Ecuador said that Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
had asked him in a telephone call not to grant asylum to Edward J. Snowden, the
fugitive former security contractor wanted in the United States.

Mr. Correa, speaking Saturday on his weekly television broadcast, said that the
two had a ''cordial'' conversation on Friday initiated by Mr. Biden but said he
could not decide on Mr. Snowden's request until he entered Ecuador.

Mr. Snowden, a former National Security Agency contractor who revealed details
about U.S. surveillance programs, fled to Hong Kong in May and then left there
in a bid to find a haven to escape charges of violating espionage laws in the
United States. On June 23 he arrived in Moscow, where he has remained out of
sight, apparently cloistered in a transit area of the airport there.

The fallout from Mr. Snowden's disclosures widened over the weekend, as the
German magazine Der Spiegel reported that the United States had eavesdropped on
offices for the European Union in Washington and Brussels and at the United
Nations in New York. Martin Schulz, the president of the European Parliament,
said that if the report was correct, it would have a ''severe impact'' on
relations between the European Union and the United States, Reuters reported.

German federal prosecutors, meanwhile, said they were looking into whether the
reported U.S. electronic surveillance programs had broken German laws, The
Associated Press reported. The Federal Prosecutors' Office said in a statement
Sunday that it was investigating the claims so as to ''achieve a reliable
factual basis'' before considering whether a formal investigation was warranted,
The A.P. said.

On Saturday, Der Spiegel reported that it was able to review ''top secret''
N.S.A. documents in Mr. Snowden's possession dated September 2010 that showed
that the agency had infiltrated E.U. computers in two locations to monitor
telephone conversations, e-mails and other documents.

The magazine said that surveillance devices were installed in the European
Union's offices in Washington and that the organization's computer networks in
Brussels had been infiltrated.

The lead writer of the article was Laura Poitras, 49, a documentary filmmaker
who emerged as the pivotal connection between Mr. Snowden and writers for The
Guardian and The Washington Post who published his leaked documents about
government surveillance. She has shared bylines with reporters of those
publications in their coverage of the N.S.A. leaks.

If Mr. Snowden, through Ms. Poitras, showed parts of his trove to Der Spiegel,
it would mark an expansion of his journalistic collaborations, which so far have
included The Guardian, The Post and The South China Morning Post of Hong Kong.
The Morning Post reported last month that Mr. Snowden had provided detailed data
showing the dates and Internet protocol addresses of specific computers in
mainland China and Hong Kong that the N.S.A. penetrated over the past four
years.

Ecuadorean officials have said that Mr. Snowden asked them for asylum. But after
initially signaling that his government was studying the request, Mr. Correa
said Thursday that under his country's laws, the request could not be processed
unless Mr. Snowden was in Ecuador or one of its embassies.

In Washington, Bernadette Meehan, a National Security Council spokeswoman,
called the discussion between Mr. Correa and Mr. Biden ''a broad conversation
regarding the bilateral relationship.''

''They did discuss Mr. Snowden, but we are not going to provide details on their
discussion,'' she said in an e-mail.

Still, Mr. Biden's call to Mr. Correa, the highest-level contact between a U.S.
official and the Ecuadorean president since revelations about Mr. Snowden's role
in releasing classified N.S.A. documents, raised new questions about whether
Ecuador was having qualms about granting asylum to Mr. Snowden.

White House officials have said that in their contacts with foreign governments
about Mr. Snowden, they have warned those governments about the felony charges
that Mr. Snowden faced in the United States and urged that they not further aid
his international flight.

Mr. Correa regularly denounces the United States, calling it an imperialist
power that tries to bully small countries like Ecuador. But he said he told Mr.
Biden that Ecuador would take the opinion of the United States into account if
it eventually had to make a decision.

He contrasted Mr. Biden's courteous attitude with what he has characterized as
the bad manners of some members of Congress who have threatened to end trade
benefits for Ecuador's exports to the United States if the country decides to
give refuge to Mr. Snowden.

The Ecuadorean president also said last week that Ecuadorean officials had had
little contact with Mr. Snowden since his arrival in Moscow.

Mr. Correa said Thursday in a news conference: ''The only contact that there has
been given Mr. Snowden's asylum request, which the foreign minister made public,
is that the ambassador went to see him in the Moscow airport. He wasn't able to
see him the first day, according to what the ambassador informed me, but he saw
him the second day. He saw that he was in good health. He repeated his desire
that Ecuador grant him asylum. Since then we really haven't had any further
contact.''

It is not clear how Mr. Snowden could get to Ecuador or one of its embassies.
The United States has revoked his passport, and Mr. Correa denied reports that
Ecuador gave him papers permitting him to travel internationally.

Last year, Ecuador granted asylum to Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks,
who has been stuck in the country's embassy in London ever since.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              334 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2013 Monday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Snowden Revelations Will Continue, Assange Says

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Washington; Pg.

LENGTH: 920 words


WASHINGTON -- Julian Assange, the founder of the antisecrecy organization
WikiLeaks, said on Sunday that even as Edward J. Snowden remained in diplomatic
limbo at a Moscow airport, the disclosures from the classified documents he took
as a National Security Agency contractor would continue.

''Look, there is no stopping the publishing process at this stage,'' Mr. Assange
said on the ABC News program ''This Week.'' ''Great care has been taken to make
sure that Mr. Snowden can't be pressured by any state to stop the publication
process.''

The fallout from Mr. Snowden's revelations widened this weekend as the German
magazine Der Spiegel reported that the United States had eavesdropped on
European Union offices in Washington, Brussels and at the United Nations in New
York.

Mr. Assange, speaking from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London where he has been
ensconced for more than a year after being granted asylum, praised Mr. Snowden's
actions and compared his plight with his own. He said Mr. Snowden was likely to
be indicted by a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Va., that Mr. Assange said
was ''made up of the C.I.A., Pentagon.''

''He is a hero,'' Mr. Assange said of Mr. Snowden. ''He has told the people of
the world and the United States that there is mass unlawful interception of
their communications, far beyond anything that happened under Nixon.''

WikiLeaks played no role in Mr. Snowden's disclosures, but since joining forces
with him, the organization has used his case to raise its own profile again.

By Mr. Assange's account, WikiLeaks helped obtain and deliver a special refugee
travel document to Mr. Snowden in Hong Kong that, with his American passport
revoked, may be important if the he is allowed to leave Moscow. Mr. Snowden has
sought asylum in Ecuador, but that country's president, Rafael Correa, has said
that any travel document given to Mr. Snowden was ''not authorized.''

A British WikiLeaks activist, Sarah Harrison, accompanied Mr. Snowden on the
Aeroflot airliner that carried him from Hong Kong to Moscow.

Asked about Mr. Snowden's current status in Moscow, Mr. Assange said that the
situation was ''a very sensitive one,'' adding, ''It's a matter of international
diplomatic negotiations, so there's little that I can productively say about
what is happening directly.''

Mr. Assange said that Mr. Snowden should be free to seek asylum where he can
because his actions are political, not criminal, despite the espionage charges
the United States has brought against him.

''He has acted in a manner to draw attention to a very serious problem in the
United States, where, without the will of Congress, without the will of the
American population, we now have a state within a state, we have the
transnational surveillance apparatus,'' Mr. Assange said.

''Ideally he should be able to return to the United States,'' he added.
''Unfortunately, that's not the world that we live in, and hopefully another
country will give him the justice that he deserves.''

Mr. Assange seemed to suggest that by canceling Mr. Snowden's passport, leaving
him ''for the moment marooned in Russia,'' the United States had inadvertently
handed the Russian spy services a potential bonanza if they exploited, as
expected, the hard drives on the four laptops Mr. Snowden is believed to be
carrying. ''Is that really a great outcome by the State Department?'' Mr.
Assange said.

Asked about the fears expressed by senior American officials, including
Secretary of State John Kerry, that the N.S.A. revelations could jeopardize the
lives of unnamed individuals and allow terrorists to alter their means of
communication to avoid detection, Mr. Assange was dismissive.

''I myself was subject to precisely this rhetoric two, three years ago, and it
all proved to be false,'' he said. ''No one from any government says that any of
our revelations in the past six years has caused anyone to come to physical
harm.''

That assertion may be true, government officials and human rights advocates say,
but they also noted that it's uncertain whether some individuals identified
directly or obliquely by the release of the WikiLeaks military and diplomatic
documents in 2010 may have suffered some harm without public attention.

''I can't imagine a government anywhere on the planet who now believes we can
keep a secret,'' Michael V. Hayden, a former director of the N.S.A. and C.IA.,
said on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation.''

In sometimes testy exchanges with George Stephanopoulos, the host of ''This
Week,'' Mr. Assange found himself on the defensive in trying to explain
Ecuador's human rights record and to counter accusations that WikiLeaks was
manipulating Mr. Snowden.

Mr. Snowden's father told NBC News this week that in a letter to Attorney
General Eric H. Holder Jr., he said his son might agree to return to the United
States to stand trial on espionage charges if certain conditions were met.

The father, Lonnie Snowden, who said he had not spoken with his son since April,
said that he was ''concerned about those who surround him,'' specifically
advisers from WikiLeaks. ''I think WikiLeaks, if you've looked at past history,
their focus isn't necessarily the Constitution of the United States,'' Mr.
Snowden said. ''It's simply to release as much information as possible.''

Mr. Assange said on Sunday that he sympathized with the elder Mr. Snowden --
''as a parent, of course he is worried in this situation'' -- and said that
WikiLeaks had contacted Lonnie Snowden's lawyer ''to put some of his concerns to
rest.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/01/us/politics/snowden-assange.html

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                        July 1, 2013 Monday 7:11 PM GMT

Edward Snowden applies for asylum in Russia;
Whistleblower Edward Snowden has applied for political asylum in Russia it has
emerged, as President Vladimir Putin said the American could stay in Moscow if
he "stops inflicting harm on our American partners".

BYLINE: By Tom Parfitt Moscow, Bruno Waterfield in Brussels and Damien McElroy

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 675 words


Mr Snowden, a former US National Security Agency contractor, is currently
thought to be in a closed area of the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo
airport after arriving there on June 23 from Hong Kong, where he had leaked
details of widespread surveillance by US security services of American citizens'
emails and telephone calls.

The furore over his continuing revelations widened yesterday, with European
states reacting angrily to claims that the US ran an extensive spying operation
against the European Union and dozens of its allies. In retaliation, President
Francois Hollande of France threatened to block negotiations on a $100
billion-a-year transatlantic free trade treaty.

With his initial bid to seek asylum in Ecuador apparently going nowhere, Mr
Snowden has now sought refuge in Russia from charges in the US of treason and
theft of government property.

Kim Shevchenko, the head of Sheremetyevo's Russian consular section, situated in
Terminal F, confirmed to the Daily Telegraph that he had received an application
for asylum from Mr Snowden on Sunday evening.

He said that it had been delivered by hand by Sarah Harrison, the WikiLeaks
employee, who according to the anti-secrecy organisation arrived from China with
Mr Snowden.

"I received those documents and informed senior representatives of the ministry
of foreign affairs. A courier from the ministry came within an hour and I handed
over the packet of documents," said Mr Shevchenko.

At a press conference in Moscow, Mr Putin said of Mr Snowden: "If he wants to go
somewhere and someone will take him - please, go ahead. If he wants to stay
here, there is one condition: that he stops his work aimed at inflicting harm on
our American partners, strange as that may sound coming from my lips."

Mr Putin said that Mr Snowden was not a Russian agent but stressed that he would
"never" be extradited to the US. "Russia never gives anybody up and doesn't plan
to in the future," he said.

The ambiguous comments suggested the Kremlin was entering a bargaining process
with Washington over the fugitive leaker's fate.

They came shortly after a senior Russian security official announced that Mr
Putin and President Barack Obama had ordered their security services to
collaborate to find a solution to the Snowden affair.

Mr Obama confirmed the US had held "high level" discussions with Moscow over Mr
Snowden. Mr Snowden's claim to be a fighter for civil freedoms would be
seriously eroded if he stays in Russia, where state security services are
regularly accused of spying on and intimidating innocent citizens at the behest
of political masters.

In Europe, Mr Hollande and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany called the
revelations "unacceptable" and the Germany foreign ministry called in the US
ambassador to demand assurances that survelliance would be stopped.

"We cannot accept this kind of behaviour between partners and allies," Mr
Hollande said.                      "We ask that this immediately stop. There
can be no negotiations or transactions in all areas until we have obtained these
guarantees, for France but also for all of the European Union, for all partners
of the United States."

Germany also backed Mr Hollande's threat to freeze trade talks launched last
month at the G8 summit, stating that "mutual trust" was a necessary basis of
negotiations.

"We aren't in the Cold War anymore," said Steffen Seibert, Merkel's chief
spokesman.

Mr Obama sought to defuse the growing row by promising to supply all the
information requested by European allies regarding the spying allegations, which
he said Washington was still evaluating.

But he added: "Every intelligence service, not just ours, but every European
intelligence service, every Asian intelligence service, wherever there's an
intelligence service, here's one thing they're going to be doing: they're going
to be trying to understand the world better."

The EU commission ordered a sweep of its headquarters and overseas offices for
the presence of listerning devices.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              337 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                        July 1, 2013 Monday 6:51 PM GMT

Edward Snowden applies for asylum in Russia;
Whistleblower Edward Snowden has applied for political asylum in Russia it has
emerged, as President Vladimir Putin said the American could stay in Moscow if
he "stops inflicting harm on our American partners".

BYLINE: By Tom Parfitt Moscow

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 448 words


Mr Snowden, a former CIA and US National Security Agency contractor, 30, is
currently thought to be in a closed area of the transit and departures zone of
Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport after flying in there on June 23 from Hong Kong,
where he leaked details of widespread surveillance by US security services of
American citizens' emails and telephone calls.

Kim Shevchenko, the head of Sheremetyevo's Russian consular section, situated in
Terminal F, confirmed to the Daily Telegraph that he had received an application
for asylum from Mr Snowden on Sunday evening.

He said that it had been delivered by hand by Sarah Harrison, the WikiLeaks
employee, who - according to the anti-secrecy organisation - arrived from China
with Mr Snowden.

"Yesterday at 22:30 the British citizen Sarah Harrison delivered Edward
Snowden's request for political asylum to the consular section of Sheremetyevo
airport," said Mr Shevchenko.

"I received those documents and informed senior representatives of the ministry
of foreign affairs. A courier from the ministry came within an hour and I handed
over the packet of documents." Mr Shevchenko said Miss Harrison had been alone
and spoke to him in English. She did not say anything more about Mr Snowden.

At a press conference in Moscow earlier on Monday, Mr Putin said of Mr Snowden:
"If he wants to go somewhere and someone will take him - please, go ahead. If he
wants to stay here, there is one condition: that he stops his work aimed at
inflicting harm on our American partners, strange as that may sound coming from
my lips."

However, the Russian president added that Mr Snowden saw himself as a "fighter
for human rights" and was unlikely to stop his revelations, meaning he should
"should choose himself a destination country and move there".

The ambiguous comments suggested the Kremlin was entering a bargaining process
with Washington over the fugitive leaker's fate.

They came shortly after a senior Russian security official announced that Mr
Putin and US President Barack Obama had ordered their security services to
collaborate to find a solution to the Snowden affair.

Mr Obama confirmed the US had held "high level" discussions with Moscow over Mr
Snowden, who is wanted in the US on espionage charges related to the leaks.

Mr Putin said that Mr Snowden was not a Russian agent but stressed that he would
"never" be extradited to the US. "Russia never gives anybody up and doesn't plan
to in the future," he said.

Mr Snowden's claim to be a fighter for civil freedoms would be seriously eroded
if he stays in Russia, where state security services are regularly accused of
spying on and intimidating innocent citizens at the behest of political masters.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              338 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 1, 2013 Monday
                                 Met 2 Edition

WikiLeaks' Assange says Snowden is 'marooned'

BYLINE: David A. Fahrenthold;Juan Forero

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1139 words


An earlier version of this story stated that Snowden had traveled from Hong Kong
to Moscow using a letter of safe passage provided by an Ecuadoran official. That
is incorrect: Snowden traveled using his U.S. passport. This version has been
corrected.

Edward Snowden seems to be stranded.

Three weeks after Snowden revealed himself as the source of leaked top-secret
documents on U.S. intelligence gathering, the former intelligence contractor is
stuck in legal limbo in Russia. Although he has not been seen publicly in days,
he is thought to be inside a transit area of a Moscow airport.

On Sunday, two of his strongest supporters - Julian Assange of WikiLeaks and
President Rafael Correa of Ecuador - said it was unlikely that Snowden would
leave there anytime soon.

"The United States, by canceling his passport, has left him for the moment
marooned in Russia," said Assange, whose anti-secrecy organization has aided
Snowden in his flight.

The United States canceled Snowden's passport a week ago, after he was charged
with espionage. Assange criticized that decision on ABC's "This Week With George
Stephanopoulos": "To take a passport from a young man in a difficult situation
like that is a disgrace," he said.

And in Ecuador on Sunday, Correa seemed to play down the chances that his
country could offer Snowden a way out. For now, Correa told the Associated
Press, Snowden was "under the care of the Russian authorities."

"This is the decision of Russian authorities. He doesn't have a passport. I
don't know the Russian laws. I don't know if he can leave the airport, but I
understand that he can't," Correa said. He said the case was out of Ecuador's
hands. "If [Snowden] arrives at an Ecuadoran embassy, we'll analyze his request
for asylum."

Snowden's escape plan was never a simple one. After first making himself one of
the most wanted men in the world, he was attempting to hopscotch 11,000 miles
from Hong Kong to Russia to Ecuador - perhaps with a stopover in Cuba.

To do it, he would have to stay ahead of U.S. law enforcement and a pack of news
media - and to count on the caprices of three (or four) foreign governments.

Snowden made it one stop. He flew from Hong Kong to Moscow a week ago,
apparently on his U.S. passport. It had already been revoked, but Hong Kong
authorities said they had not received the official request from the U.S.
government.

Now, Snowden's flight has brought him to the transit area of Sheremetyevo
International Airport. And to a dwindling set of options.

One is simply staying in the airport. If Snowden is not being detained by
Russian authorities - and Russian officials have said that he is not - he could
remain in an area reserved for international travelers making connections. As
long as he does not go through passport control, Russian officials say, he would
not legally cross into Russian territory.

If he wants to leave, however, Snowden would need travel documents to replace
his canceled passport.

Earlier,  it appeared that Ecuadoran officials might be willing to help him with
this. On June 22, the Ecuadoran Embassy in London issued a safe-conduct pass in
his name. (Assange himself is holed up at the same embassy, avoiding extradition
to Sweden for questioning over  allegations of sexual abuse).

But it seems unlikely that Ecuador would provide the same kind of help again.

On Sunday, Correa told the Associated Press that the Ecuadoran official who
issued the pass had committed "a serious error" by not consulting officials back
home. Correa said the consul would be punished, though he didn't specify how.

Correa's tone seemed to have shifted after a conversation with Vice President
Biden on Friday. Where Correa had earlier been defiant, he now voiced respect
for U.S. legal procedures.

"If he really could have broken North American laws, I am very respectful of
other countries and their laws, and I believe that someone who breaks the law
must assume his responsibilities," Correa said, according to AP.

Snowden might be able to obtain travel documents from another country - one
willing to showily defy the U.S. government. In Venezuela, for instance,
President NicolÃ¡s Maduro recently praised Snowden for revealing the extent of
U.S. surveillance.

"No one has up to this point formally asked us to give political asylum to this
young person, Snowden," said Maduro, who was scheduled to arrive in Russia on
Monday for a trade mission. "If they asked us for it, we'd think about it, think
about it. And it's almost certain that we'd give it to him. Why? Because asylum
is an international humanitarian right to protect those who are being pursued
for noble causes."

Snowden might also seek asylum from Russia itself.

On Sunday, a spokesman for Russian President Vladimir Putin said Snowden is not
the Kremlin's concern. But he also noted that "public opinion on the subject is
very rich," and he pointed out that politicians and human rights defenders had
spoken in support of offering Snowden asylum. "We are aware of that and take it
into account."

That could perhaps be a nod toward the possibility of asylum. Or not.

For now, only one country seems to be offering Snowden a certain way out of his
airport limbo. It's the one he doesn't want to go back to.

"Mr. Snowden is hardly 'marooned' since he is still a United States citizen and
his country is willing to take him back," said Nanda Chitre, a spokeswoman for
the Justice Department. "The U.S. government is prepared to issue individuals
wanted on felony charges a one-entry travel document to return home."

U.S. authorities charged Snowden last month with theft, "unauthorized
communication of national defense information" and "willful communication of
classified communications intelligence information to an unauthorized person."

The charges were filed in federal court in Alexandria, whose jurisdiction
includes the headquarters of contractor Booz Allen Hamilton, Snowden's former
employer. On Sunday, Assange argued that Snowden could not expect justice in
that court.

"The jury pool is made up of the CIA, Pentagon, etc.," Assange said. "There's a
. . . 99.97 percent chance that if you're a target of the grand jury, you'll be
indicted. And a 99 percent chance that if you're indicted by a grand jury, you
will be convicted."

Asked whether those statistics were correct, a spokesman for the U.S. attorney
in that district declined to comment Sunday.

Assange was asked by Stephanopoulos whether WikiLeaks was in possession of other
secrets that Snowden took with him.

"Look, there is no stopping the publishing process at this stage," Assange said.
"Great care has been taken to make sure that Mr. Snowden can't be pressured by
any state to stop the publication process."

david.fahrenthold@washpost.com

Forero reported from Bogota, Colombia. Kathy Lally in Moscow and Jia-Lynn Yang
in Beijing contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              339 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              June 30, 2013 Sunday

Programme summary of Russian Channel One "Voskresnoye Vremya" 30 Jun 13

LENGTH: 950 words


"Voskresnoye Vremya" presented by Irada Zeynalova

0041 Look ahead at the programme over video: Search for Snowden; 2m migrants in
Moscow; female suicide bombers; resignation of emir of Qatar; dangers of theme
parks; older women giving birth; daredevils.

1. 0326 Former CIA man Edward Snowden has not been seen since fleeing from Hong
Kong, presenter says. He is believed to have come to Moscow's Sheremetyevo but
has not crossed the border. He has left USA wondering why no-one wants to help
it find the man who revealed that it spies on the whole world, presenter says.
Video report showed journalists looking to Snowden on board airliners, in Cuba
and Ecuador; archive photos of Wikileaks founder Assange, who said Snowden was
safe. US intelligence services made too many mistakes and can hardly hope to get
hold of Snowden and put him on trial, correspondent says. With his passport
cancelled, Snowden can stay in Sheremetyevo transit zone ad infinitum, as
"hundreds" have done before him, he says. President Putin is shown commenting on
25 June. His friends and neighbours in USA have been questioned, correspondent
says. He quotes Snowden's comments in New York Times. Back in 2010, he was very
critical of Wikileaks. Snowden's father tries to explain his actions on US TV. A
former Israeli secret service officer says Snowden appears to know too much.
President Obama tries to press Russia and China but is cautious, correspondent
says. Correspondent says US reputation has been marred by Assange, Manning and
Snowden. Der Spiegel is the latest magazine to publish Snowden's revelations.
The more revelations are published, the more people sympathize with Snowden,
correspondent says.

2. 1318 News just in: Reuters quotes Ecuadoran president saying Snowden's fate
is in Russia's hands.

3. 1342 Nabiullina succeed Ignatyev as Central Bank chief. A reshuffle in
financial hierarchy followed, involving Belousov and Ulyukayev. Putin is shown
meeting Ulyukayev after his appointment to ministerial post. Experts quoted
saying Ulyukayev favoured low inflation, Nabiullina favoured fast growth.

4. 1505 New formula for pension calculations will take effect in 2015. The draft
was presented by Labour Ministry. Presenter explains the formula. Labour
Minister Topilin says those who continue working in old age will benefit. An
expert says people should check how the changes affect them.

5. 1744 Moscow police detained nearly 1,500 residents of an illegal hostel for
migrants, and a group of "underground bankers from Turkey", who cashed in over
R7bn. There are 1.5m legal and nearly 2m illegal migrants in Moscow, and they
form close-knit communities closed to outsiders, presenter says. Video report
showed a Tajik and a Kyrgyz woman going to work in Moscow. One in 10 people in
Russia are of Central Asian origin, correspondent says. Immigrant communities in
Moscow have their own hairdressing salons, clinics, newspapers, banks and so on.
A Russian passport is the ultimate object of desire. Most migrants from Central
Asia are Uzbeks; they work as builders and janitors. Many chefs are also
migrants.

6. 2515 Government has announced a radical reform of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, saying it was necessary to combat stagnation. A special agency will
deal with financial and property matters. Prime Minister Medvedev is shown
addressing government on 27 June, saying reform is necessary.

2659 Still to come; commercials.

7. 3029 Islamic radicals look for young Russian girls, persuade them to marry
men from North Caucasus, presenter says; they are then told their fiances were
killed and then sent out as suicide bombers. A recruitment centre was found in
Makhachkala. Video report showed a woman in Astrakhan whose daughter eloped to
Dagestan. A spokesman for the local FSB directorate says the girls are
psychologically pressured into committing suicide and killing others. A
16-year-old girl from Astrakhan was reportedly trained as a suicide bomber but
changed her mind and returned. Others tell her story. Several other girls with
similar stories are interviewed. The FSB spokesman says militants focus on girls
of Slav appearance because they raise no suspicions. Hundreds have been
recruited but only a few have come back, correspondent says.

8. 3825 Emir of Qatar resigned and left the throne to his son. Presenter says he
was "the most influential man in the Middle East, the sponsor of the Arab
spring" and the father of Al-Jazeera. The succession was planned together with
USA, she says. Video report showed Arab TV footage of a ceremony, a pundit in
Geneva saying the emir's decision came as a surprise in the region.
Correspondent says "it is clear" that emir did not resign because of ill health.
Nor was he afraid of Arab spring. Correspondent speculates about conflict in the
ruling family, with comments from a blogger, who says the group that ended up on
top is anti-Syrian. Correspondent talks about rivalry between Qatar and Saudi
Arabia, says Turkey chose Qatar as ally. Turkish journalist links everything to
war in Syria. Pundit Geydar Dzhemal says USA wants all Sunni Muslims to fight
against Iran so that USA can focus on Russia and China. Correspondent predicts
troubles for Saudi rulers, says the region is plunging into chaos, and this
chaos "inexorably moves towards us".

9. 4519 Video report on the dangers of theme park rides, after a woman was
killed in Perm.

5055 Still to come; commercials.

10. 5413 More and more women after 40 are giving birth. Video report on what
makes older women decide to become mothers.

11. 6030 Video report on daredevils who perform potentially lethal stunts.

6710 Presenter signs off

Source: Channel One TV, Moscow, in Russian 1700 gmt 30 Jun 13

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              340 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ecuador Leader Says Biden Called Him About Snowden

BYLINE: By WILLIAM NEUMAN; Maggy Ayala contributed reporting from Quito, and
Eric Schmitt from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 854 words


QUITO, Ecuador -- President Rafael Correa of Ecuador said Saturday that Vice
President Joseph R. Biden Jr. had asked him in a telephone call not to grant
asylum to Edward J. Snowden, the fugitive former security contractor wanted in
the United States.

Mr. Correa, speaking on his weekly television broadcast, said that the two had a
''cordial'' conversation on Friday initiated by Mr. Biden, but said he could not
decide on Mr. Snowden's request until he entered Ecuador.

The fallout from Mr. Snowden's disclosures widened Saturday, as the German
magazine Der Spiegel reported that the United States had eavesdropped on
European Union offices in Washington, Brussels and at the United Nations in New
York. Mr. Snowden, a former National Security Agency contractor who revealed
details about American surveillance programs, fled to Hong Kong last month and
then left there in a bid to find a haven to escape charges of violating
espionage laws in the United States. He arrived in Moscow last Sunday, where he
has remained out of sight, apparently cloistered in a transit area of the
airport there.

Ecuadorean officials have said that Mr. Snowden asked them for asylum. But after
initially signaling that his government was studying the request, Mr. Correa
said Thursday that under his country's laws, the request could not be processed
unless Mr. Snowden was in Ecuador or one of its embassies.

In Washington, Bernadette Meehan, a National Security Council spokeswoman,
called the discussion between Mr. Correa and Mr. Biden ''a broad conversation
regarding the bilateral relationship.''

''They did discuss Mr. Snowden, but we are not going to provide details on their
discussion,'' she said in an e-mail.

Still, Mr. Biden's call to Mr. Correa, the highest-level contact between an
American official and the Ecuadorean president since revelations about Mr.
Snowden's role in releasing classified N.S.A. documents, raised new questions
about whether Ecuador is having qualms about granting asylum to Mr. Snowden.

White House officials have said in recent days that in their contacts with
foreign governments about Mr. Snowden, they have warned those governments about
the felony charges that Mr. Snowden faced in the United States and urged that
they not further aid his international flight.

Mr. Correa regularly denounces the United States, calling it an imperialist
power that tries to bully small countries like Ecuador. But he said he told Mr.
Biden that Ecuador would take the opinion of the United States into account if
it eventually had to make a decision in the case.

He contrasted Mr. Biden's courteous attitude with what he has characterized as
the bad manners of some members of Congress who have threatened to end trade
benefits for Ecuador's exports to the United States if the country decides to
give refuge to Mr. Snowden.

The Ecuadorean president also said last week that Ecuadorean officials had had
little contact with Mr. Snowden since his arrival in Moscow.

Mr. Correa said Thursday in a news conference: ''The only contact that there has
been given Mr. Snowden's asylum request, which the foreign minister made public,
is that the ambassador went to see him in the Moscow airport. He wasn't able to
see him the first day, according to what the ambassador informed me, but he saw
him the second day. He saw that he was in good health. He repeated his desire
that Ecuador grant him asylum. Since then we really haven't had any further
contact.''

It is not clear how Mr. Snowden could get to Ecuador or one of its embassies.
The United States has revoked his passport, and Mr. Correa denied reports that
Ecuador gave him papers permitting him to travel internationally.

Last year, Ecuador granted asylum to Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks,
who has been stuck in the country's embassy in London ever since.

On Saturday, Der Speigel reported that it was able to review ''top secret''
N.S.A. documents in Mr. Snowden's possession dated September 2010 that showed
that the agency had infiltrated European Union computers in two locations to
monitor telephone conversations, e-mails and other documents.

The magazine said that surveillance devices were installed in the European
Union's offices in Washington and that the organization's computer networks in
Brussels had been infiltrated.

The lead writer of the article was Laura Poitras, 49, a documentary filmmaker
who emerged as the pivotal connection between Mr. Snowden and writers for The
Guardian and The Washington Post who published his leaked documents about
government surveillance. She has shared bylines with reporters of those
publications in their coverage of the N.S.A. leaks.

If Mr. Snowden, through Ms. Poitras, showed parts of his trove to Der Spiegel,
it would mark an expansion of his journalistic collaborations, which so far have
included The Guardian, The Post and The South China Morning Post of Hong Kong.
The Morning Post reported this month that Mr. Snowden had provided detailed data
showing the dates and Internet protocol addresses of specific computers in
mainland China and Hong Kong that the N.S.A. penetrated over the last four
years.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/30/world/americas/ecuador-leader-says-biden-calle
d-him-about-snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Rafael Correa of Ecuador, center, before an image of
Edward J. Snowden in a television studio on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RODRIGO
BUENDIA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                              June 30, 2013 Sunday

Biden asks Ecuador president to nix Snowden asylum

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 668 words


Vice President Joe Biden has asked Ecuador to turn down an asylum request from
National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden, the country"s president said
Saturday.

Rafael Correa, in a weekly television address, offered little sympathy for the
Obama administration"s view that Snowden is a criminal who should be swiftly
returned to the U.S. At the same time, he vowed to seek American input on any
asylum request and suggested Snowden will have to answer for his actions.

The Friday phone call between Correa and Biden - it"s the highest-level
conversation between the U.S. and Ecuador to be disclosed since Snowden began
seeking asylum - added to the confusion about Snowden"s status. Facing espionage
charges in the U.S., Snowden is believed to be holed up in a Moscow airport"s
transit zone and seeking safe passage to Ecuador, the country seen as likeliest
to shelter America"s most wanted fugitive.

Julian Assange, founder of the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks, has been given
asylum in Ecuador"s embassy in London.

Correa said he had a "friendly and very cordial" conversation with Biden, and
told the vice president that Ecuador hadn"t sought to be put in the situation of
deciding whether to harbor an American justice-dodger. He said Ecuador can"t
consider the asylum request until Snowden is on Ecuadorean soil.

"The moment that he arrives, if he arrives, the first thing is we"ll ask the
opinion of the United States, as we did in the Assange case with England,"
Correa said. "But the decision is ours to make."

White House spokeswoman Bernadette Meehan confirmed that the two leaders spoke
by phone Friday and discussed Snowden, but she wouldn"t disclose any details
about the conversation.

A staunch critic of the U.S., Correa rebuked the Obama administration for
hypocrisy, invoking the case of brothers Roberto and William Isaias, bankers
whose extradition from the U.S. Correa said Ecuador has been seeking. "Let"s be
consistent. Have rules for everyone, because that is a clear double-standard
here," he said.

The leftist leader sought to direct attention away from Snowden"s actions and
back to the U.S. spying secrets he exposed, summoning a theme he"s invoked to
the delight of his strongest backers since Snowden, a former NSA contractor,
revealed the agency"s massive Internet and phone surveillance to two newspapers,
fleeing all the while from Hong Kong to Moscow in evasion of U.S. authorities.

"The really grave thing is what Snowden has reported," Correa said. "He will
have to assume his responsibilities, but the grave thing is his reporting of the
biggest massive spy operation in the history of humanity, inside and outside the
United States."

Ecuadorean officials have acknowledged its embassy in London issued Snowden a
letter of safe passage that calls on other countries to allow him to travel to
asylum in Ecuador. But Ecuador"s secretary of political management, Betty Tola,
said the letter was invalid because it was issued without central government
approval in Quito, the capital.

Obama and his aides have tempered their rhetoric about Snowden in recent days
after more heated attempts to pressure China and Russia over his extradition
raised tensions with those nations, threatening to undercut cooperation with the
two major powers on other issues.

But Ecuador has seemed to delight in tweaking the U.S. over the issue, accusing
America of human rights violations and blowing off warnings about how the U.S.
might respond if Ecuador doesn"t cooperate.

After the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Sen. Bob Menendez,
D-N.J., on Wednesday threatened an effort to block renewal of Ecuador"s tariff
benefits on hundreds of millions of dollars in trade, Ecuador preemptively
renounced the benefits themselves, claiming the trade deal had become "a new
instrument of blackmail."

As for Biden, Correa suggested it wasn"t personal. He praised the vice president
for being more courteous than "those badly behaved and confused ones in the
Senate who threaten our country."

- AP

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              342 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                           The Sunday Times (London)

                              June 30, 2013 Sunday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Fugitive Snowden hides data timebomb

BYLINE: Michael Sheridan

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 673 words


THE rogue American intelligence contractor Edward Snowden left a backup copy of
his trove of secret data in Hong Kong as an "insurance policy" that could have
devastating consequences for western security interests, according to sources
familiar with his time in the Chinese city.

Snowden travelled to the former British enclave last month with data he had
downloaded from National Security Agency computers. If released, it could
compromise western intelligence gathering. He was allowed to fly to Moscow last
Sunday and has remained there in limbo, apparently in a transit area of the
airport. One week on coverage in the Russian media is signalling that the
government may give him at least temporary refuge.

Russian television has called him "the man who declared war on Big Brother",
prompting speculation Snowden might be given refuge in the country. His
application for asylum in Ecuador, which hosts the WikiLeaks founder Julian
Assange in its London embassy, has run into trouble. Snowden's father has said
he could come home to face trial in the US.

Sarah Harrison, a British activist with WikiLeaks, is thought to have been among
lawyers and advisers who have been helping Snowden protect himself. Snowden, an
expert on data encryption, has said: "The US government is not going to be able
to cover this up by jailing or murdering me.

Truth is coming and it cannot be stopped."

The threat to release new secrets does not seem to be idle, according to people
familiar with Snowden's stay in Hong Kong. They hint that he did not carry his
four laptops to Hong Kong airport last Sunday or, if he did, encrypted copies of
the contents are locked in a safe or a bank vault.

The public face of Snowden's legal team, who negotiated his flight from Chinese
territory, was Albert Ho, a veteran champion of democracy and civil rights. Ho
says Snowden believed he had found sanctuary in Hong Kong.

Lawyers met Snowden at a safe house on June 18. "I went to a shop and bought a
big pizza, and several pieces of fried chicken and some sausages, some cakes and
some Pepsis and other soft drinks," Ho recalled. On their arrival, Snowden
indicated the fridge, where he insisted his visitors placed their mobile phones
to avoid surveillance.

Ho said Snowden had a good analytical mind and knew he faced a long struggle
with the American legal system. But Snowden had not grasped that he might be
detained in Hong Kong during the extradition battle, which could take years, and
would therefore lose access to his computers.

The prospect appalled Snowden. He asked Ho to find out whether he would be
allowed free passage to leave Hong Kong. Ho sought out officials from the Hong
Kong government on Friday, June 21. He was puzzled when they refused to respond
to queries.

The reason was that China, which controls Hong Kong's foreign affairs, had
reaped its propaganda gains and now wanted Snowden off its hands.

Between Friday afternoon and Saturday morning, an unidentified emissary of the
Hong Kong authorities contacted Snowden: he would be free to go - but go he
must.

The Hong Kong justice department had, to its relief, discovered clerical errors
in the papers from America seeking Snowden's extradition on espionage charges.

Yuen Kwok-keung, the justice minister, said the documents gave Snowden's middle
name as James rather than Joseph and failed to confirm his passport number.
There was, he said: "No legal basis to ask the court to issue a warrant for his
provisional arrest."

The Chinese had their let-out. Early last Sunday, a lawyer accompanied Snowden
to the terminal. As they checked in for the Aeroflot flight to Moscow, the
lawyer sensed that men in plain clothes were watching them. Snowden passed an
initial security check and presented his American passport, which the US says it
had revoked, to the immigration officer. It was stamped and he vanished into the
security queue. Now he has disappeared from view, having first taken care to
encrypt his own legacy.

A hack is the best form of defence in GCHQ's cyberbunker, News Review, page 7

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Edward Snowden has not been seen since he left Hong Kong. He is
believed to have had help from Sarah Harrison of WikiLeaks
NATIONAL/ALBERT TAN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                    Copyright 2013 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              344 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                             June 29, 2013 Saturday
                               1 - State Edition

The NSA whistleblower grew up in the shadow of its headquarters. What turned him
against it? Snowden's evolution a puzzle

BYLINE: ADAM GELLER, BRIAN WITTE FORT MEADE, MARYLAND

SECTION: FOREIGN; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 1421  words


IN the suburbs edged by woods midway between Baltimore and the US capital,
residents long joked that the government spy shop next door was so
ultra-secretive its initials stood for ``No Such Agency''.

But when Edward Snowden grew up There, the National Security Agency's looming
presence was both a very visible and accepted part of everyday life.

When Snowden - the 29-year-old intelligence contractor whose leaking of
top-secret documents has exposed sweeping government surveillance programs -
went to Arundel High School, the agency regularly sent employees from its nearby
black-glass headquarters to tutor struggling maths students.

When Snowden went on to Anne Arundel Community College in the spring of 1999
after leaving high school halfway through his sophomore year, he arrived on a
campus developing a specialty in cybersecurity training for future employees of
the NSA and Department of Defence - though, according to records, he never took
such a class.

And when he joined friends in his late teens to edit a website built around a
shared interest in Japanese animation, they charted the venture from an
apartment in military housing at Fort George G. Meade, the installation that
houses the NSA centre dubbed the Puzzle Palace and calls itself the ``nation's
pre-eminent centre for information, intelligence and cyber.''

In this setting, it's easy to see how the young Snowden was exposed to the
notion of spycraft as a career, first with the CIA and later as a systems
analyst for two companies under contract to the NSA. But details of his early
life in the agency's shadows Only magnify the contradictions inherent in
Snowden's decision to become a leaker.

What, after all, did he think he was getting into when he signed up to work for
the nation's espionage agencies?

And what specifically triggered a ``crisis of conscience'' - as described by a
friend who knew him when he worked for the CIA - so profound it convinced him to
betray the secrets he was sworn to keep?

The latter is a question that even Snowden, in interviews since his disclosures,
has answered piecemeal.

``I'm no different from anybody else,'' he said in a video interview with The
Guardian newspaper. ``I don't have special skills. I'm just another guy who sits
there day to day in the office, watches what's happening, and goes: This is not
our place to decide. The public needs to decide whether these programs and
policies are right or wrong.''

Posts to online blogs and forums, public records, and interviews with Snowden's
neighbours, teachers and acquaintances reveal someone who prized the American
ideal of personal freedom but became disenchanted with the way the government
secretly operates in the name of national security.

Those who knew him describe him as introspective, but seem puzzled by where the
mindset led him.

``He's very nice, shy, reserved,'' Jonathan Mills, the father of Snowden's
longtime girlfriend, said outside his home in Laurel, Maryland.

``He's always had strong convictions of right and wrong, and it kind of makes
sense, but still, a shock.''

Snowden, who was born in 1983, spent his early years in Elizabeth City, North
Carolina, before his family moved to the Maryland suburbs when he was nine.

His father, Lonnie, was a warrant officer for the US Coast Guard. His mother,
Elizabeth, worked for the US District Court in Maryland in 1998 and is now its
chief deputy of administration and information technology.

In 2001, Snowden's parents divorced. his mother bought a condominium in nearby
Ellicott Cit and her son, then 19, moved in by himself.

Snowden became a prolific participant in a technology blog, Arstechnica. He
posted more than 750 comments between late 2001 and mid-2012 under the pseudonym
TheTrueHOOHA.

In 2002, he posted a query asking for advice on getting an IT job in Japan.
Later he argued that by pirating poorly made software he was justly punishing
companies for their ineptitude.

But he also touched on questions of security and privacy. In one October 2003
thread, he asked so many questions about how to hide the identity of his
computer server that another discussion participant asked why he was being so
paranoid.

Snowden replied: ``Patriot Act. If they misinterpret that actions I perform, I
could be a cyb4r terrorist and that would be very. . . bad.''

In May 2004, he enlisted in the army.

``I wanted to fight in the Iraq war because I felt like I had an obligation as a
human being to help free people from oppression,'' he told The Guardian.

``Most of the people training us seemed pumped up about killing Arabs, not
helping anyone.''

Snowden began training as a special forces soldier but did not complete it and
was administratively discharged.

He has said he was hired by the CIA to work on IT security and in 2007 the
agency assigned him to work in Geneva, Switzerland.

The Swiss foreign ministry confirmed he lived and worked in Geneva, where it
says he was accredited to the UN as a US Mission employee from March 2007 to
February 2009.

``During that time period he did quit the CIA, so I knew that he was having a
crisis of conscience of sorts,'' said Mavanee Anderson, who worked with him in
Geneva.

``But I am still surprised, even shocked. He never gave me any indication that
he would reveal anything that was top secret.''

Snowden told The Guardian he was discouraged by an incident in which he claimed
CIA agents tried to recruit a Swiss banker to provide secret information.

They purposely got him drunk, Snowden said, and when the man was arrested for
driving while intoxicated, an agent offered to help as a way to forge a bond.

``Much of what I saw in Geneva really disillusioned me about how my government
functions and what its impact is in the world.''

He has said he left the embassy to take a job with private contractors for the
NSA - first with Dell, the computer company.

He has said he worked at an NSA installation on a US military base in Japan.

By then, Snowden and girlfriend Lindsay Mills had long been a couple.

Ms Mills joined him in Hawaii in June last year, and they settled into a rented
home on a corner block..

Neighbours said the couple were pleasant, quiet and kept to themselves.

Snowden told nextdoor neighbour Angel Cunanan he worked for the military.

By January of this year, he was secretly edging forward with a plan to leak NSA
documents, contacting documentary filmmaker Laura Poitras with an anonymous
offer to share information on US intelligence.

The following month he contacted Glenn Greenwald, an American in Brazil who
writes on surveillance issues for The Guardian, as well as Barton Gellman, a
reporter for The Washington Post.

In March, Snowden switched employers, moving to contractor Booz Allen Hamilton
in Hawaii.

Mills headed back to the East Coast for a visit and when she returned to Hawaii,
she wrote, Snowden unexpectedly told her he too needed to get away. He told his
employer that he needed some time off for medical treatment. On May 20, he flew
to Hong Kong.

Three weeks later, as intelligence officials raced to control the damage from
the NSA leaks, Snowden revealed himself as the person responsible.

HOW IT UNFOLDED

MAY 20, 2013: Edward Snowden, an employee of defence contractor Booz Allen
Hamilton at the National Security Agency, arrives in Hong Kong from Hawaii.
Snowden carries four laptop computers that enable him to gain access to some of
the United States government's most highly classified secrets.

JUNE 1: The Guardian journalists Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill and
documentary maker Laura Poitras fly from New York to Hong Kong. They meet
Snowden in a Kowloon hotel after he identifies himself with a Rubik's cube and
begin a week of interviews with their source.

JUNE 5 The Guardian publishes its first exclusive story based on Snowden's leak.

JUNE 9: Snowden goes public. In a video interview, he says: ``I have no
intention of hiding who I am because I know I have done nothing wrong.''

JUNE 12: Hong Kong's South China Morning Post publishes the first interview with
Snowden since he revealed his identity. He intends to stay in Hong Kong until
asked to leave and discloses the NSA has been hacking Chinese computers since
2009.

JUNE 14: Home Office tells airlines Snowden can't board UK-bound flights.

JUNE 21: The US files espionage charges against Snowden, requesting Hong Kong
detain him for extradition.

JUNE 23: Snowden leaves on a flight to Moscow. The Hong Kong government says the
US documents do not ``fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong
law'' and it had no legal basis to prevent him leaving.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              345 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                             June 29, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hong Kong keeps poker face with Snowden

BYLINE: Kelvin Chan; in Hong Kong

SECTION: A; Pg. A016

LENGTH: 499  words


Hong Kong keeps poker face with Snowden By Kelvin Chan in Hong Kong Edward
Snowden's bespectacled and goateed face was almost unavoidable in Hong Kong last
week. It stared out from news stands, banners and giant television screens after
it became known that the admitted leaker of US secrets was in town and in
hiding.

Still, when the US asked the semi- autonomous Chinese city for Mr Snowden's
provisional arrest, its response was essentially this: Who exactly do you mean?

Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen said Hong Kong officials were not sure who to look
for because the US government got Mr Snowden's middle name wrong in documents
filed in support of its arrest request.

He said Hong Kong immigration records listed Mr Snowden's middle name as Joseph,
but the US government used the name James in some documents and referred to him
only as Edward J. Snowden in others.

"These three names are not exactly the same. Therefore, we believed that there
was a need to clarify," Mr Yuen said.

Mr Yuen said US authorities also failed to provide Mr Snowden's passport number.
He said officials received the arrest request on June 15 and sent a request on
June 21 for clarification. Two days later, with Washington yet to respond, Mr
Snowden flew to Moscow.

Mr Yuen maintains the Hong Kong government had "no legal basis for restricting
or prohibiting Mr Snowden leaving Hong Kong".

US officials do not accept Hong Kong's explanation.

The US Justice Department said the government gave Hong Kong all the information
that was required under the terms of their extradition treaty.

"The fugitive's photos and videos were widely reported through many news
outlets. That Hong Kong would ask for more information about his identity
demonstrates that it was simply trying to create a pretext for not acting on the
provisional arrest request," a spokeswoman said on condition of anonymity.

Hong Kong's decision to let Mr Snowden go has raised tensions between the two
countries.

US officials suggested that China had a hand in letting Mr Snowden leave Hong
Kong, a former British colony that is now a semi- autonomous region with its own
legal system. But Hong Kong leaders say they were following the city's rule of
law in processing the US request.

Mr Snowden is expected to seek asylum in Ecuador. Russian President Vladimir
Putin said this week the American was in the transit area of Moscow's main
airport, but a horde of reporters has found no trace of him.

US President Barack Obama said he would not engage in "wheeling and dealing" or
jeopardise co- operation on a broad range of issues with China or Russia in
pursuit of Mr Snowden, nor would he make personal approaches to Mr Putin.

"I shouldn't have to," Mr Obama said Mr Obama also said he had no plans to use
the military to intercept any flight with Mr Snowden aboard.

"No, I'm not going to be scrambling jets" to go after a "hacker", he said.

His comments reflected efforts by the US to turn from confrontation to diplomacy
in seeking the return of Mr Snowden. AP

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


       Copyright 2013 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              346 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                             June 29, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hong Kong keeps poker face with Snowden

BYLINE: Kelvin Chan; in Hong Kong

SECTION: A; Pg. A016

LENGTH: 499  words


Hong Kong keeps poker face with Snowden By Kelvin Chan in Hong Kong Edward
Snowden's bespectacled and goateed face was almost unavoidable in Hong Kong last
week. It stared out from news stands, banners and giant television screens after
it became known that the admitted leaker of US secrets was in town and in
hiding.

Still, when the US asked the semi- autonomous Chinese city for Mr Snowden's
provisional arrest, its response was essentially this: Who exactly do you mean?

Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen said Hong Kong officials were not sure who to look
for because the US government got Mr Snowden's middle name wrong in documents
filed in support of its arrest request.

He said Hong Kong immigration records listed Mr Snowden's middle name as Joseph,
but the US government used the name James in some documents and referred to him
only as Edward J. Snowden in others.

"These three names are not exactly the same. Therefore, we believed that there
was a need to clarify," Mr Yuen said.

Mr Yuen said US authorities also failed to provide Mr Snowden's passport number.
He said officials received the arrest request on June 15 and sent a request on
June 21 for clarification. Two days later, with Washington yet to respond, Mr
Snowden flew to Moscow.

Mr Yuen maintains the Hong Kong government had "no legal basis for restricting
or prohibiting Mr Snowden leaving Hong Kong".

US officials do not accept Hong Kong's explanation.

The US Justice Department said the government gave Hong Kong all the information
that was required under the terms of their extradition treaty.

"The fugitive's photos and videos were widely reported through many news
outlets. That Hong Kong would ask for more information about his identity
demonstrates that it was simply trying to create a pretext for not acting on the
provisional arrest request," a spokeswoman said on condition of anonymity.

Hong Kong's decision to let Mr Snowden go has raised tensions between the two
countries.

US officials suggested that China had a hand in letting Mr Snowden leave Hong
Kong, a former British colony that is now a semi- autonomous region with its own
legal system. But Hong Kong leaders say they were following the city's rule of
law in processing the US request.

Mr Snowden is expected to seek asylum in Ecuador. Russian President Vladimir
Putin said this week the American was in the transit area of Moscow's main
airport, but a horde of reporters has found no trace of him.

US President Barack Obama said he would not engage in "wheeling and dealing" or
jeopardise co- operation on a broad range of issues with China or Russia in
pursuit of Mr Snowden, nor would he make personal approaches to Mr Putin.

"I shouldn't have to," Mr Obama said Mr Obama also said he had no plans to use
the military to intercept any flight with Mr Snowden aboard.

"No, I'm not going to be scrambling jets" to go after a "hacker", he said.

His comments reflected efforts by the US to turn from confrontation to diplomacy
in seeking the return of Mr Snowden. AP

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


       Copyright 2013 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              347 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                             June 29, 2013 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Father says snowden could return for fair trial; He worries about WikiLeaks
adviser

BYLINE: Jon Swaine, The London Daily Telegraph

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


The fugitive intelligence contractor who leaked documents on U.S. spying
operations is being "manipulated" by people around him and would return to the
United States if he were guaranteed a fair trial, his father said Friday.

Edward Snowden, who released details of National Security Agency surveillance
programs before fleeing overseas, could come home if allowed to choose the
location of his prosecution and was not subjected to a "gag" order, Lonnie
Snowden said.

His son, 30, is still believed to be in Russia after leaving Hong Kong and
booking a flight for Cuba, which he did not take. He is thought to be
accompanied by Sarah Harrison, a legal adviser for WikiLeaks, the
pro-transparency group that released a vast cache of U.S. diplomatic cables in
2010, and exgirlfriend of its founder, Julian Assange.

Lonnie Snowden told NBC News that WikiLeaks was taking advantage of his son. "I
am concerned about those who surround him," he said. "WikiLeaks - if you look at
past history - their focus isn't necessarily the Constitution of the United
States. It's simply to release as much information as possible."

Snowden is facing charges of espionage in the U.S. and has requested political
asylum in Ecuador. He has not been seen since he arrived in Moscow on Sunday.
Russian officials have said he remains in a transit zone of Sheremetyevo
airport.

Moscow has declined to

extradite Snowden, but appears reluctant to risk a diplomatic incident by
allowing him to enter the country formally.

Lonnie Snowden was poised Friday night to state that his son could return to the
U.S. in certain circumstances in a letter sent via his lawyer to Eric Holder,
the U.S. attorney general.

He conceded that he had not been in contact with his son since the weeks before
his decision to leave his job as an analyst at Booz Allen, a major U.S. defence
contractor, at an NSA listening post in Hawaii, and hand a trove of documents to
The Guardian and Washington Post. Amid an ongoing dispute about the Chinese
dependency's failure to approve a U.S. extradition request before he travelled
on to Russia, Hong Kong stated Friday that Snowden would not be welcome to
return because his American passport had been cancelled.

U.S. officials accuse Hong Kong of deliberately stalling when the request was
made, giving Snowden time to escape. Chinese officials claim that the
contractor's middle name was spelled incorrectly on the U.S. application,
meaning that it had to

be sent back for corrections.

Hong Kong officials are also demanding more information from the U.S. on claims
by Snowden that he had proof that u.s. spies had eavesdropped on communications
in China.

Ecuador this week said that a trade pact with the U.S., which is due for
renewal, had become a "new instrument of blackmail" in negotiations over
Snowden's fate. Sen. Bob Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat who chairs the Senate
foreign relations committee, said that if Ecuador granted Snowden asylum, he
would "make sure there is no chance for renewal" of pacts that allow the country
to exploit dutyfree trading with the U.S. In his letter requesting asylum from
Ecuador, Snowden said it was "unlikely" that he would get a fair trial in U.S.
courts.

Lonnie Snowden, a retired officer of the U.S. Coast Guard, said he believed that
the American public would forgive his son, who could face life in prison or even
the death penalty if convicted under the Espionage Act.

"He has betrayed his government, but I don't believe that he's betrayed the
people of the United States," he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sergei Grits, The Associat Ed Press; The Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow
on Thursday. A dozen Russian and foreign journalists occupied the transit zone
of the airport as yet another Havana-bound flight left with no sight of NSA
leaker Edward Snowden.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              349 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              June 28, 2013 Friday

Edward Snowden: Extradition: Obama plays down moves to apprehend whistleblower

BYLINE: Spencer Ackerman in Washington

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 627 words


After high-stakes international efforts to find and apprehend Edward Snowden,
the US surveillance whistleblower, President Barack Obama indicated yesterday
that he would not spend much political or diplomatic capital to make the former
National Security Agency contractor stand trial in the United States.

Obama said yesterday that he would not engage in "wheeling and dealing" to
persuade foreign governments - principally Russia - to return Snowden to the US,
where he has been indicted on espionage charges related to his leak of
classified information to the Guardian and Washington Post about broad NSA
surveillance operations.

Obama said he had yet to speak to the Russian or Chinese leadership about
Snowden, emphasising his desire to place trade and other bilateral issues above
that of the whistleblower.

"I'm not going to be scrambling jets to get a 29-year-old hacker," Obama said,
according to a tweet from the Washington Post's David Nakamura.

The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, confirmed on Tuesday that Snowden was in
the transit area of Sheremetyevo airport, Moscow, awaiting a potential flight to
Ecuador, where he has requested political asylum. For five days, Snowden's
mysterious flight from Hong Kong and future travel plans have captured global
attention. "I'm sure there will be a made-for-TV movie," Obama reportedly said.

Putin said that Russia would not extradite Snowden to the United States and
asserted that Russia's security services had not been in contact with Snowden, a
claim greeted with international scepticism given Snowden's knowledge of some of
the most sensitive secrets about the US surveillance apparatus.

Obama's remarks damp down days of heated rhetoric from his administration about
Snowden. On Sunday the justice department emailed reporters a detailed timeline
about its efforts to work with Hong Kong to arrest and extradite the 30-year-old
former NSA contractor, contradicting Hong Kong's public claim that the US did
not follow the proper legal procedures to apprehend him. A US National Security
Council spokeswoman warned that Snowden's departure might prove "detrimental to
US-Hong Kong and US-China bilateral relations".

An anonymous senior administration official went further, insulting Russia and
China in the course of attempting to discredit Snowden - at the same time as the
Obama administration attempted to work with both countries on the issue,
particularly Russia.

"Mr Snowden's claim that he is focused on supporting transparency, freedom of
the press and protection of individual rights and democracy is belied by the
protectors he has potentially chosen: China, Russia, Cuba, Venezuela and
Ecuador," the official told reporters in an emailed message early on Monday.

The main Chinese state newspaper, the People's Daily, responded on Tuesday by
praising Snowden for "tearing off Washington's sanctimonious mask".

It remains to be seen what Obama will do to facilitate Snowden's extradition, or
if his remarks indicate that Obama is downplaying Snowden after nearly a month
of being vexed by his disclosures. On Sunday, General Keith Alexander, Obama's
NSA director, said Snowden "has caused irreversible and significant damage to
our country and to our allies".

Members of the US Congress have called Snowden a traitor and are likely to put
pressure on the Obama administration to intensify its effort to get him to the
US to stand trial.

"I hope we'll chase him to the ends of the earth, bring him to justice and let
the Russians know there will be consequences if they harbour this guy," Senator
Lindsey Graham said on Sunday.

Captions:

Michelle Obama greets pupils at Martin Luther King school for girls in Dakar,
Senegal. The Obamas are visiting three African countries Photograph: Joe
Penney/Reuters

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              350 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                              June 28, 2013 Friday

No wheeling and dealing over Snowden, says Obama;
Whistleblower potentially faces months in limbo at Moscow airport

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 486 words


SPENCER ACKERMAN in Washington and MIRIAM ELDER in Moscow

After weeks of high-stakes international tension to find and apprehend
whistleblower Edward Snowden, US president Barack Obama indicated that he would
not spend much geopolitical capital to make the former National Security Agency
(NSA) contractor stand trial in the US.

Mr Obama said yesterday he would not engage in "wheeling and dealing" to
persuade foreign governments - principally Russia - to return Mr Snowden to
America, where he has been indicted on espionage charges related to his leak of
classified information.

'Scrambling jets'Mr Obama said he had yet to speak to the Russian or Chinese
leadership concerning Mr Snowden, emphasising a desire to place trade and other
bilateral issues ahead of the whistleblower. "I'm not going to be scrambling
jets to get a 29-year-old hacker," he said, according to a tweet from the
Washington Post's David Nakamura.

Russian president Vladimir Putin confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Snowden was in the
transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, awaiting a potential journey to
Ecuador, where he had requested political asylum.

Mr Putin said Russia would not extradite Mr Snowden to the US and asserted that
Russia's security services had not been in contact with Mr Snowden, a claim
greeted with international scepticism given Mr Snowden's knowledge of some of
the most sensitive secrets about the US surveillance apparatus.

Meanwhile, Ecuador has ramped up its defiance of the US over Mr Snowden by
waiving preferential trade rights with Washington even as the whistleblower's
prospect of reaching Quito dimmed.

Ecuador waives trade rightsPresident Rafael Correa's government said yesterday
it was renouncing the Andean Trade Preference Act to thwart US "blackmail" of
Ecuador in the former NSA contractor's asylum request.

Officials also offered a $23m donation for human rights training in the US, a
riposte to recent US criticism of Ecuador's own human rights record.

Betty Tola, Ecuador's minister of political co-ordination, said the asylum
request had not been processed because Mr Snowden was neither in Ecuador nor at
an Ecuadorean embassy or consulate. "The petitioner is not in Ecuadorean
territory as the law requires."

Ms Tola also said Ecuador had not supplied any travel document or diplomatic
letter to Mr Snowden, whose US passport has been invalidated.

The renunciation underlined divisions within Ecuador's government between
leftists who have embraced Mr Snowden as an anti-imperialist symbol and
centrists who fear diplomatic and economic damage.

Earlier in the day Ricardo PatiÃ±o, Ecuador's foreign minister, said Mr
Snowden's case was similar to that of the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, who
has been granted asylum at its embassy in London. "It took us two months to make
a decision in the case of Assange, so do not expect us to make a decision sooner
this time." - (Guardian service)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              365 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 28, 2013 Friday

Edward Snowden: hot potato

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 871 words


As NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden remains holed up somewhere in the transit
zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, at least three governments are involved
in high-stakes backdoor negotiations over his fate.

Politicians in the United States vowed to step up pressure on Russia and
Ecuador. The latter has suggested it might give asylum to Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program. But for Ecuador and
Russia, the key question was whether the whistleblower was a gift of fate or a
hot potato.

By the end of this week, a number of Russian politicians were increasingly
seeing him as an opportunity to exploit.

Russia's Federation Council, the upper house of parliament, wants Snowden to
help investigate whether American Internet companies provided information about
Russian citizens to the U.S. government.

'We invite Edward Snowden to work with us and hope that as soon as he settles
his legal status, he will collaborate with our working group and provide us with
proof of U.S. intelligence agencies' access to the servers of Internet
companies,' Senator Ruslan Gattarov was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying on
Thursday, a day after Russia's upper house of parliament decided to set up a
special working group to investigate Snowden's claims.

Earlier, Kirill Kabanov, a member of President Vladimir Putin's Human Rights
Council, called on colleagues to appeal to the Kremlin to grant asylum for
Snowden.

Given that Putin himself suggested that giving Snowden asylum was as useless as
'shearing a pig - a lot of squealing and no fleece,' why has Snowden suddenly
become so appealing for Russia's political elite?

'It's very good to demonstrate to the world that the United States isn't such a
big defender of human rights as it makes itself out to be,' Sergei Markov, a
pro-Kremlin analyst and the prorector of the Plekhanov Russian University of
Economics, told The Moscow News. 'And it's good to show that Russia can act
independently of the United States. Plus, if he stays, there's a possibility
that our security services will have access to his information.'

Putin was notoriously lukewarm on Snowden, saying on Tuesday that the sooner he
left the country, the better. But that, Markov said, was part personal, and part
political ploy.

'[Putin] is a former intelligence officer, and for him [what Snowden did] is
betrayal,' Markov said. 'Also, Putin doesn't want to think that Russia organized
[Snowden's arrival to Moscow].'

But other analysts reflected Putin's skepticism, and said that keeping Snowden
in Russia would be a mistake.

'It should not be done,' Alexander Konovalov, President of the Institute of
Strategic Assessment, told The Moscow News, suggesting that Snowden posed a
liability by being too unpredictable.

'No one really knows what he was motivated by. It wasn't money. It wasn't
Communist ideals, which don't matter anymore,' he said. 'So what were they? He's
part of a new information society, and for many of these people, there is a
conflict between the responsibilities they've undertaken before the state, and
the responsibilities which they themselves feel they have before humanity. We
will increasingly be seeing people like this here in Russia.'

That, Konovalov said, is not something the Kremlin would be looking forward to.

A similar indecisiveness on whether Snowden was worth the trouble was reflected
in the United States, where President Barack Obama was lukewarm on pressing for
Snowden's extradition.

"I have not called [Chinese] President Xi [Jinping] personally or President
Putin personally and the reason is ... number one, I shouldn't have to," Obama
said this week, adding that given the business America does with Russia, Snowden
just wasn't worth 'wheeling and dealing and trading on a whole host of other
issues.'

For some lawmakers, on the other hand, extraditing Snowden was a matter of
political principle.

U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC) told The Daily Beast that the extradition was
a 'defining moment' in America's relationship with Russia.

'We are exploring what are the leverage points. I'm trying to put together a
package to let the Russians know how serious we are,' he was quoted as saying.

But even in the States, other lawmakers, like Carl Levin of the Senates Armed
Services Committee, recognize they have little leverage over Russia.

Pressure by the United States on Ecuador - which too distanced itself from
Snowden when it denied it had given him refugee documents of passage - has
already backfired, for example.

After Senator Bob Menendez (D-NJ), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, threatened Ecuador's trade arrangements with the United States if it
grants asylum to Snowden, Ecuador thumbed its nose and renounced the
preferential tariffs anyway, 'in the face of threats, insolence and arrogance of
certain U.S. sectors,' President Rafael Correa said on Thursday.

Indeed, both Ecuador and fellow leftist ally Venezuela seem to be in the middle
- exploiting the political rhetoric, but not committing to Snowden himself. Both
have made strong statements against the United States, but have largely remained
careful in offering Snowden asylum.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              382 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 28, 2013 Friday

Edward Snowden: hot potato

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 871 words


As NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden remains holed up somewhere in the transit
zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, at least three governments are involved
in high-stakes backdoor negotiations over his fate.

Politicians in the United States vowed to step up pressure on Russia and
Ecuador. The latter has suggested it might give asylum to Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program. But for Ecuador and
Russia, the key question was whether the whistleblower was a gift of fate or a
hot potato.

By the end of this week, a number of Russian politicians were increasingly
seeing him as an opportunity to exploit.

Russia's Federation Council, the upper house of parliament, wants Snowden to
help investigate whether American Internet companies provided information about
Russian citizens to the U.S. government.

'We invite Edward Snowden to work with us and hope that as soon as he settles
his legal status, he will collaborate with our working group and provide us with
proof of U.S. intelligence agencies' access to the servers of Internet
companies,' Senator Ruslan Gattarov was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying on
Thursday, a day after Russia's upper house of parliament decided to set up a
special working group to investigate Snowden's claims.

Earlier, Kirill Kabanov, a member of President Vladimir Putin's Human Rights
Council, called on colleagues to appeal to the Kremlin to grant asylum for
Snowden.

Given that Putin himself suggested that giving Snowden asylum was as useless as
'shearing a pig - a lot of squealing and no fleece,' why has Snowden suddenly
become so appealing for Russia's political elite?

'It's very good to demonstrate to the world that the United States isn't such a
big defender of human rights as it makes itself out to be,' Sergei Markov, a
pro-Kremlin analyst and the prorector of the Plekhanov Russian University of
Economics, told The Moscow News. 'And it's good to show that Russia can act
independently of the United States. Plus, if he stays, there's a possibility
that our security services will have access to his information.'

Putin was notoriously lukewarm on Snowden, saying on Tuesday that the sooner he
left the country, the better. But that, Markov said, was part personal, and part
political ploy.

'[Putin] is a former intelligence officer, and for him [what Snowden did] is
betrayal,' Markov said. 'Also, Putin doesn't want to think that Russia organized
[Snowden's arrival to Moscow].'

But other analysts reflected Putin's skepticism, and said that keeping Snowden
in Russia would be a mistake.

'It should not be done,' Alexander Konovalov, President of the Institute of
Strategic Assessment, told The Moscow News, suggesting that Snowden posed a
liability by being too unpredictable.

'No one really knows what he was motivated by. It wasn't money. It wasn't
Communist ideals, which don't matter anymore,' he said. 'So what were they? He's
part of a new information society, and for many of these people, there is a
conflict between the responsibilities they've undertaken before the state, and
the responsibilities which they themselves feel they have before humanity. We
will increasingly be seeing people like this here in Russia.'

That, Konovalov said, is not something the Kremlin would be looking forward to.

A similar indecisiveness on whether Snowden was worth the trouble was reflected
in the United States, where President Barack Obama was lukewarm on pressing for
Snowden's extradition.

"I have not called [Chinese] President Xi [Jinping] personally or President
Putin personally and the reason is ... number one, I shouldn't have to," Obama
said this week, adding that given the business America does with Russia, Snowden
just wasn't worth 'wheeling and dealing and trading on a whole host of other
issues.'

For some lawmakers, on the other hand, extraditing Snowden was a matter of
political principle.

U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC) told The Daily Beast that the extradition was
a 'defining moment' in America's relationship with Russia.

'We are exploring what are the leverage points. I'm trying to put together a
package to let the Russians know how serious we are,' he was quoted as saying.

But even in the States, other lawmakers, like Carl Levin of the Senates Armed
Services Committee, recognize they have little leverage over Russia.

Pressure by the United States on Ecuador - which too distanced itself from
Snowden when it denied it had given him refugee documents of passage - has
already backfired, for example.

After Senator Bob Menendez (D-NJ), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, threatened Ecuador's trade arrangements with the United States if it
grants asylum to Snowden, Ecuador thumbed its nose and renounced the
preferential tariffs anyway, 'in the face of threats, insolence and arrogance of
certain U.S. sectors,' President Rafael Correa said on Thursday.

Indeed, both Ecuador and fellow leftist ally Venezuela seem to be in the middle
- exploiting the political rhetoric, but not committing to Snowden himself. Both
have made strong statements against the United States, but have largely remained
careful in offering Snowden asylum.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              393 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 28, 2013 Friday

Edward Snowden: hot potato

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 871 words


As NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden remains holed up somewhere in the transit
zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, at least three governments are involved
in high-stakes backdoor negotiations over his fate.

Politicians in the United States vowed to step up pressure on Russia and
Ecuador. The latter has suggested it might give asylum to Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program. But for Ecuador and
Russia, the key question was whether the whistleblower was a gift of fate or a
hot potato.

By the end of this week, a number of Russian politicians were increasingly
seeing him as an opportunity to exploit.

Russia's Federation Council, the upper house of parliament, wants Snowden to
help investigate whether American Internet companies provided information about
Russian citizens to the U.S. government.

'We invite Edward Snowden to work with us and hope that as soon as he settles
his legal status, he will collaborate with our working group and provide us with
proof of U.S. intelligence agencies' access to the servers of Internet
companies,' Senator Ruslan Gattarov was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying on
Thursday, a day after Russia's upper house of parliament decided to set up a
special working group to investigate Snowden's claims.

Earlier, Kirill Kabanov, a member of President Vladimir Putin's Human Rights
Council, called on colleagues to appeal to the Kremlin to grant asylum for
Snowden.

Given that Putin himself suggested that giving Snowden asylum was as useless as
'shearing a pig - a lot of squealing and no fleece,' why has Snowden suddenly
become so appealing for Russia's political elite?

'It's very good to demonstrate to the world that the United States isn't such a
big defender of human rights as it makes itself out to be,' Sergei Markov, a
pro-Kremlin analyst and the prorector of the Plekhanov Russian University of
Economics, told The Moscow News. 'And it's good to show that Russia can act
independently of the United States. Plus, if he stays, there's a possibility
that our security services will have access to his information.'

Putin was notoriously lukewarm on Snowden, saying on Tuesday that the sooner he
left the country, the better. But that, Markov said, was part personal, and part
political ploy.

'[Putin] is a former intelligence officer, and for him [what Snowden did] is
betrayal,' Markov said. 'Also, Putin doesn't want to think that Russia organized
[Snowden's arrival to Moscow].'

But other analysts reflected Putin's skepticism, and said that keeping Snowden
in Russia would be a mistake.

'It should not be done,' Alexander Konovalov, President of the Institute of
Strategic Assessment, told The Moscow News, suggesting that Snowden posed a
liability by being too unpredictable.

'No one really knows what he was motivated by. It wasn't money. It wasn't
Communist ideals, which don't matter anymore,' he said. 'So what were they? He's
part of a new information society, and for many of these people, there is a
conflict between the responsibilities they've undertaken before the state, and
the responsibilities which they themselves feel they have before humanity. We
will increasingly be seeing people like this here in Russia.'

That, Konovalov said, is not something the Kremlin would be looking forward to.

A similar indecisiveness on whether Snowden was worth the trouble was reflected
in the United States, where President Barack Obama was lukewarm on pressing for
Snowden's extradition.

"I have not called [Chinese] President Xi [Jinping] personally or President
Putin personally and the reason is ... number one, I shouldn't have to," Obama
said this week, adding that given the business America does with Russia, Snowden
just wasn't worth 'wheeling and dealing and trading on a whole host of other
issues.'

For some lawmakers, on the other hand, extraditing Snowden was a matter of
political principle.

U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC) told The Daily Beast that the extradition was
a 'defining moment' in America's relationship with Russia.

'We are exploring what are the leverage points. I'm trying to put together a
package to let the Russians know how serious we are,' he was quoted as saying.

But even in the States, other lawmakers, like Carl Levin of the Senates Armed
Services Committee, recognize they have little leverage over Russia.

Pressure by the United States on Ecuador - which too distanced itself from
Snowden when it denied it had given him refugee documents of passage - has
already backfired, for example.

After Senator Bob Menendez (D-NJ), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, threatened Ecuador's trade arrangements with the United States if it
grants asylum to Snowden, Ecuador thumbed its nose and renounced the
preferential tariffs anyway, 'in the face of threats, insolence and arrogance of
certain U.S. sectors,' President Rafael Correa said on Thursday.

Indeed, both Ecuador and fellow leftist ally Venezuela seem to be in the middle
- exploiting the political rhetoric, but not committing to Snowden himself. Both
have made strong statements against the United States, but have largely remained
careful in offering Snowden asylum.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              407 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 28, 2013 Friday

Edward Snowden: hot potato

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 871 words


As NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden remains holed up somewhere in the transit
zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, at least three governments are involved
in high-stakes backdoor negotiations over his fate.

Politicians in the United States vowed to step up pressure on Russia and
Ecuador. The latter has suggested it might give asylum to Snowden, a former
contractor for the U.S. National Security Agency wanted by the United States for
leaking reports about a top-secret surveillance program. But for Ecuador and
Russia, the key question was whether the whistleblower was a gift of fate or a
hot potato.

By the end of this week, a number of Russian politicians were increasingly
seeing him as an opportunity to exploit.

Russia's Federation Council, the upper house of parliament, wants Snowden to
help investigate whether American Internet companies provided information about
Russian citizens to the U.S. government.

'We invite Edward Snowden to work with us and hope that as soon as he settles
his legal status, he will collaborate with our working group and provide us with
proof of U.S. intelligence agencies' access to the servers of Internet
companies,' Senator Ruslan Gattarov was quoted by RIA Novosti as saying on
Thursday, a day after Russia's upper house of parliament decided to set up a
special working group to investigate Snowden's claims.

Earlier, Kirill Kabanov, a member of President Vladimir Putin's Human Rights
Council, called on colleagues to appeal to the Kremlin to grant asylum for
Snowden.

Given that Putin himself suggested that giving Snowden asylum was as useless as
'shearing a pig - a lot of squealing and no fleece,' why has Snowden suddenly
become so appealing for Russia's political elite?

'It's very good to demonstrate to the world that the United States isn't such a
big defender of human rights as it makes itself out to be,' Sergei Markov, a
pro-Kremlin analyst and the prorector of the Plekhanov Russian University of
Economics, told The Moscow News. 'And it's good to show that Russia can act
independently of the United States. Plus, if he stays, there's a possibility
that our security services will have access to his information.'

Putin was notoriously lukewarm on Snowden, saying on Tuesday that the sooner he
left the country, the better. But that, Markov said, was part personal, and part
political ploy.

'[Putin] is a former intelligence officer, and for him [what Snowden did] is
betrayal,' Markov said. 'Also, Putin doesn't want to think that Russia organized
[Snowden's arrival to Moscow].'

But other analysts reflected Putin's skepticism, and said that keeping Snowden
in Russia would be a mistake.

'It should not be done,' Alexander Konovalov, President of the Institute of
Strategic Assessment, told The Moscow News, suggesting that Snowden posed a
liability by being too unpredictable.

'No one really knows what he was motivated by. It wasn't money. It wasn't
Communist ideals, which don't matter anymore,' he said. 'So what were they? He's
part of a new information society, and for many of these people, there is a
conflict between the responsibilities they've undertaken before the state, and
the responsibilities which they themselves feel they have before humanity. We
will increasingly be seeing people like this here in Russia.'

That, Konovalov said, is not something the Kremlin would be looking forward to.

A similar indecisiveness on whether Snowden was worth the trouble was reflected
in the United States, where President Barack Obama was lukewarm on pressing for
Snowden's extradition.

"I have not called [Chinese] President Xi [Jinping] personally or President
Putin personally and the reason is ... number one, I shouldn't have to," Obama
said this week, adding that given the business America does with Russia, Snowden
just wasn't worth 'wheeling and dealing and trading on a whole host of other
issues.'

For some lawmakers, on the other hand, extraditing Snowden was a matter of
political principle.

U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC) told The Daily Beast that the extradition was
a 'defining moment' in America's relationship with Russia.

'We are exploring what are the leverage points. I'm trying to put together a
package to let the Russians know how serious we are,' he was quoted as saying.

But even in the States, other lawmakers, like Carl Levin of the Senates Armed
Services Committee, recognize they have little leverage over Russia.

Pressure by the United States on Ecuador - which too distanced itself from
Snowden when it denied it had given him refugee documents of passage - has
already backfired, for example.

After Senator Bob Menendez (D-NJ), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, threatened Ecuador's trade arrangements with the United States if it
grants asylum to Snowden, Ecuador thumbed its nose and renounced the
preferential tariffs anyway, 'in the face of threats, insolence and arrogance of
certain U.S. sectors,' President Rafael Correa said on Thursday.

Indeed, both Ecuador and fellow leftist ally Venezuela seem to be in the middle
- exploiting the political rhetoric, but not committing to Snowden himself. Both
have made strong statements against the United States, but have largely remained
careful in offering Snowden asylum.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              408 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Seeks to Play Down Significance of Fugitive Leaker

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY, MICHAEL D. SHEAR and WILLIAM NEUMAN; Ellen Barry
reported from Moscow; Michael D. Shear from Dakar, Senegal; and William Neuman
from Quevedo, Ecuador. Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York,
Andrew Roth from Moscow, and Chris Buckley from Hong Kong.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 992 words


President Obama sought Thursday to minimize the significance of a fugitive
former national security contractor wanted for leaking government secrets,
calling him a ''29-year-old hacker'' and suggesting that American frustration
with China and Russia for apparently helping him evade extradition was not worth
damaging relations with those countries.

Mr. Obama's remarks, his most extensive comments on the fugitive, Edward J.
Snowden, came as new confusion swirled over Mr. Snowden's ultimate destination,
with Ecuador's government saying it could not decide on his request for asylum
unless he was in that country or one of its embassies elsewhere.

Mr. Snowden, who turned 30 last week, has been ensconced out of sight at an
international transit lounge in a Moscow airport since Sunday, when he arrived
from Hong Kong despite an American effort to extradite him on criminal charges.
There had been speculation that he would board a Havana-bound flight on
Thursday, but he did not, raising the possibility that his legal limbo could
stretch into weeks in his odyssey to reach a third country.

Mr. Obama, speaking to reporters in Dakar, Senegal, at the start of a trip to
Africa, said he had not personally called the presidents of China or Russia on
the Snowden case because he did not want to elevate its importance. He said
other nations should simply be willing to return Mr. Snowden to the United
States as a matter of law enforcement.

''This is something that routinely is dealt with,'' Mr. Obama said. ''This is
not exceptional from a legal perspective. I'm not going to have one case
suddenly being elevated to the point where I have to do wheeling and dealing and
trading.''

He rejected the suggestion that he might order the military to intercept any
plane that might be carrying Mr. Snowden. ''I'm not going to be scrambling jets
to get a 29-year-old hacker,'' Mr. Obama said.

His remarks on Mr. Snowden's case followed similarly toned-down language by his
aides on the severity of the problem, reflecting efforts by the administration
to smooth relations with Russia and China. Earlier in the day, China's Defense
Ministry accused the administration of hypocrisy, using Mr. Snowden's
disclosures about American surveillance abroad as evidence that China is a
victim, not a perpetrator, of cyberspying and hacking.

Mr. Snowden's disclosures have embarrassed the administration and raised debate
about the government's invasion of privacy. Mr. Snowden and his supporters,
including WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy group, have called him a whistle-blower
and a hero. Federal prosecutors have charged him with violating espionage laws,
and some American legislators have called him a traitor.

Ecuador, which is protecting Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, at its
London embassy, has confirmed that Mr. Snowden has requested asylum and has
suggested that his human rights could be violated if he were returned to the
United States. But Ecuador, which had said it could take months to evaluate the
asylum request, suggested Thursday that all the attention focused on its
decision was misplaced.

''Mr. Snowden is not in Ecuadorean territory and to process an asylum request
that is what is required,'' the country's president, Rafael Correa, said during
a news conference on Thursday in Quevedo, in western Ecuador. ''We received the
asylum request, we have studied it and that is precisely the first conclusion,
that to process it to finally approve it or deny it he must be in Ecuadorean
territory.''

Asked if he had considered bringing Mr. Snowden to Ecuador or to one of his
country's embassies, he said, ''No.''

Mr. Correa also disputed assertions made earlier in the week by Mr. Assange and
others that Mr. Snowden had been given travel documents by Ecuador that assured
him safe passage to the country.

''The government has not authorized any safe-conduct or refugee permit for Mr.
Snowden,'' Mr. Correa said. Referring to a safe-conduct document that appeared
to have been issued by Ecuador's embassy in London, he said that if it turned
out to be authentic, ''whoever issued it is totally without authority.''

Saying they would not bow to threats, officials in Ecuador also announced that
they were unilaterally renouncing preferential trade privileges given to the
country by the United States. Those privileges, which apply to Ecuadorean
exports worth hundreds of millions of dollars, were to expire at the end of
July, and were unlikely to be renewed by Congress because of the strained
relationship between the two countries. Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New
Jersey and chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, warned Ecuador on
Wednesday that its ''trade preferences could be revoked'' if it granted Mr.
Snowden's asylum request.

Russian officials have said they consider Mr. Snowden a free man and have hinted
that they were pressuring him to leave. President Vladimir V. Putin said Tuesday
that ''the sooner he chooses his final destination, the better for us and for
him.''

Whether he is feeling pressure to leave is unclear: a Russian immigration
official close to the situation said that Mr. Snowden was entitled to stay in
the airport as long as he wanted, even though he has not asked for a Russian
visa or received one.

An extended stay in Russia would seem to narrow Mr. Snowden's options, allowing
American officials to dangle carrots and sticks before countries like Ecuador
and Venezuela that are considering granting him asylum.

A buzz of suspense surrounded Flight 150 to Havana on Thursday at Sheremetyevo
airport in Moscow, with expectations that Mr. Snowden would be a passenger.

But no unusual security measures were visible as passengers boarded the flight,
with two dozen reporters and photographers pressed against the terminal window
as the plane backed away from the gate. Journalists from Reuters and ABC, who
had booked tickets in hopes of interviewing Mr. Snowden, said it appeared that
he was not on board.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/28/world/snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The police gathered on Thursday in front of Sheremetyevo
airport in Moscow, where Edward J. Snowden is believed to be staying.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY YURI KOCHETKOV/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)
  President Rafael Correa said Thursday that Mr. Snowden was not in Ecuadorean
territory. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RODRIGO BUENDIA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 28, 2013 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Diplomacy applied late in the game

BYLINE: Philip Rucker;Sari Horwitz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 1486 words


For the first 12 days, the Obama administration's effort to extradite government
leaker Edward Snowden from Hong Kong was a by-the-book legal affair - overseen
by the Justice Department and involving few if any diplomatic overtures,
according to senior administration officials.

That legalistic approach has resulted in a political and public relations
debacle. By the time U.S. officials had begun applying diplomatic pressure on
Hong Kong and Chinese authorities last weekend, it was too late: Snowden had
boarded a flight to Moscow in search of asylum.

The missteps have thrust the United States into a geopolitical confrontation
that has embarrassed the Obama administration and strained relations with China,
Russia and other countries.

President Obama on Thursday defended the handling of the international chase for
the former government contractor, calling it a legal matter and saying he was
"not going to be scrambling jets to get a 29-year-old hacker." Asked whether he
had personally called Chinese President Xi Jinping or Russian President Vladimir
Putin about Snowden, Obama said he had not.

"I shouldn't have to," Obama added at a news conference in Senegal. "I'm not
going to have one case of a suspect who we're trying to extradite suddenly being
elevated to the point where I've got to start doing wheeling and dealing and
trading on a whole host of other issues simply to get a guy extradited."

But many experts in extradition law argue that that is precisely what's needed
in the case. They said the Obama administration underestimated how much
diplomatic finesse and creativity would be required to detain Snowden, allowing
him to move further outside the reach of the U.S. government.

"The administration followed the playbook and played it correctly, except what
they didn't seem to anticipate is that Hong Kong would not comply," said Jacques
Semmelman, a former federal prosecutor and expert on extradition procedure.

Stephen I. Vladeck, an associate dean at American University's Washington
College of Law who studies national security law, said the administration made
mistakes by just going "through the motions."

"It should have been clear from the get-go that the government was going to need
more than just a prima facie case for extradition here, but also the political
and diplomatic cooperation of the Hong Kong - and, perhaps, Chinese -
authorities," Vladeck said.

P.J. Crowley, a former State Department spokesman under Secretary of State
Hillary Rodham Clinton, said extradition requests as high-profile as Snowden's
should not be seen "through a legal lens."

"This is about politics and about perceived and competing interests on all
sides," Crowley said. He added: "When it becomes public, then it becomes a
diplomatic issue. And when it becomes personal, it becomes a political issue."

To be sure, the full extent of the Obama administration's diplomatic entreaties
to Hong Kong and Beijing might not be known publicly. Considering the profile of
Snowden's case, experts said they would be surprised if there had not been
secret high-level diplomatic talks between U.S. officials and authorities in
Hong Kong and Beijing.

"They don't like to make this public," said Leslie H. Gelb, president emeritus
of the Council on Foreign Relations. "They'd rather do it by the books, because
if China and Russia reject us, it's better to reject the Justice Department than
the White House."

Still, the Obama administration's public accounts thus far show that it pursued
Snowden's extradition from Hong Kong primarily through legal channels. When
Obama was asked about Snowden on Monday, he referred reporters to the Justice
Department.

After Snowden revealed himself June 9 as the leaker of classified documents
revealing National Security Agency surveillance programs, administration
officials said they followed interagency protocols in trying to return Snowden
to the United States to stand trial.

The White House's National Security Council has coordinated the broad response
to the Snowden case but let officials at the Justice Department - lawyers, not
diplomats - take the lead on the extradition process and make their own
decisions, according to a senior administration official. The official, like
others interviewed, spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss details of
the government's response.

Although the Justice Department followed protocol laid out in its extradition
treaty with Hong Kong, there were also some low-level communications between
U.S. consulate officials and the Hong Kong and Chinese governments,
administration officials said.

On June 14, the United States filed criminal charges against Snowden in federal
court, but they took a gamble by sealing the charges - which meant they could
not use them as cause to revoke his passport. U.S. officials said they feared
Snowden might flee if he found out about the charges, and they wanted time to
work out the provisional arrest request with Hong Kong.

Extradition is generally a lengthy process, but Justice Department officials
believed it was advancing at a rapid pace with Snowden. "It was an unbelievably
quick turnaround," one law enforcement official said.

On June 19, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. called his counterpart in Hong
Kong, Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen, to personally underscore the importance
of arresting Snowden. At the White House, where national security aides kept
Obama up to speed with regular briefings, officials said they believed Justice
lawyers were close to an agreement.

But on the night of June 21 - after the Justice Department had unsealed
Snowden's criminal charges - U.S. officials realized they had hit a snag,
according to a senior administration official. That's when Hong Kong authorities
raised questions about the U.S. charges against Snowden and sought clarification
about paperwork, the official said.

As U.S. officials were preparing a response letter and fired off their first
strongly worded public statement warning Hong Kong of complicating relations
with the United States, they learned that Snowden was on an Aeroflot flight
bound for Moscow, the senior administration official said.

"It wasn't necessarily clear that someone other than the Department of Justice
and the interagency process we already had was going to be needed," the official
said.

In the final hours before Snowden departed, the State Department stepped up its
involvement. On Saturday, State revoked his passport, according to a senior
State Department official. A passport cannot be revoked in a criminal matter
until the charges are made public, which had just been done the night before,
the official said.

Hong Kong authorities said they did not receive the official U.S. notice until
Wednesday. But State Department spokesman Patrick Ventrell said they "were well
aware of our interest in Mr. Snowden and had plenty of time to prohibit his
travel."

Yuen, the Hong Kong justice minister, said this week that his country allowed
Snowden to travel because of alleged mistakes by the United States in making the
extradition request. Yuen said in an interview with the South China Morning Post
that the name used in U.S. diplomatic documents was Edward James Snowden, while
the Justice Department referred to him as Edward J. Snowden and Hong Kong's
Immigration Department had him recorded as Edward Joseph Snowden.

Yuen also said the United States failed to provide adequate evidence or explain
how two of the three charges in its arrest request fell within the scope of the
extradition treaty signed by both nations in 1996.

U.S. officials insisted that they followed procedure and said Hong Kong's
concerns amounted to a stalling tactic. One U.S. official close to the
discussions said Hong Kong's claim that it could not properly identify Snowden
because of inconsistencies in his middle name was "laughable," noting that his
videotaped confession was being replayed "all over the news."

Justice officials said that if Hong Kong authorities really wanted the issue
clarified, they would have waited for U.S. officials to provide answers before
allowing Snowden to leave the country.

Experts said that Hong Kong authorities seized on procedural irregularities,
fairly or not, to delay the U.S. request long enough to allow Snowden to flee to
Russia.

"It's really hard to play Monday-morning quarterback in a case like this,"
Vladeck said, "because there's no guarantee that Hong Kong would have cooperated
- even if all the i's had been dotted and t's crossed."

As for Snowden, all evidence suggests he remains ensconced in the transit area
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport. On Thursday, another daily Aeroflot flight to
Havana closed its doors without any sign that the American fugitive was on
board.

philip.rucker@washpost.com

sari.horwitz@washpost.com

Anne Gearan in Washington, Kathy Lally in Moscow, David Nakamura in Dakar,
Senegal, and Jia Lynn Yang in Hong Kong contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              410 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                                 First Edition

'It's like shearing a pig': Putin refuses to hand over fugitive;
Whistleblower - Snowden 'in Russian airport'

BYLINE: Paul McGeough, Chief Foreign Correspondent - Washington, United States

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 590 words


Just when the Snowden spy saga needs comic relief to counter Washington's
bad-tempered diplomacy, in walks Russian president Vladimir Putin with his own
way of describing what might be in the whole deal for Moscow: "It's like
shearing a pig - lots of screams, but little wool."

Clearly the Russian leader thought he could indulge in such colourful language
because, for the benefit of the international throngs following the story, he
had just answered the "where's Wally?" question. Indeed, Mr Snowden was still at
Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport; though in the transit area which, technically,
meant he was not in the country.

If only in the eyes of US officials who think otherwise, Mr Putin veered towards
the disingenuous, insisting that his security agencies had not interrogated Mr
Snowden or been through his four laptops.

And showing he was not to be cowed by the American bully boys, Mr Putin vowed
that Russian authorities would not comply with American demands that Mr Snowden
be snatched and handed over to them.

Just as security specialists presume that Chinese agents hoovered all they
needed from the laptops while Mr Snowden hunkered in Hong Kong, with or without
the former intelligence contractor's permission, a former US intelligence
official was dour in a prognostication he shared with The Washington Post.

"That stuff is gone," he said.

"I guarantee the Chinese intelligence service got their hands on that right
away. If they imaged the hard drives and then returned them to him, well, then
the Russians have that stuff now."

"That stuff" could be huge. The Guardian journalist at the centre of the Snowden
drama, has talked of Mr Snowden having thousands of documents - only a handful
of which have been reported so far.

The US National Security Agency has indicated it will take months to trawl its
classified databases to establish just what Snowden lifted.

But a former government official told the Post: "They think he copied so much
stuff - that almost everything that place does, he has." By "that place", he
means the NSA as he alluded to a sense of loathing at the agency: "Everyone's
nervous about what the next thing will be, what will be exposed."

Speaking in Finland, Mr Putin argued that Mr Snowden was being treated like any
other transit passenger before he dismissed implicit and explicit accusations
from Washington as "nonsense and rubbish".

Referring to Mr Snowden and WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is helping to
get Mr Snowden to asylum in Ecuador, Mr Putin added: "[They] consider themselves
human rights activists and say they are fighting for the spread of information."

There were signs that Washington is issuing chill pills to senior officials.
Couching his words in the terms in which indignant Chinese and Russian officials
used to reject his hotheaded comments of Monday, a more measured US Secretary of
State John Kerry told reporters in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: "We're not looking for
a confrontation. We're not ordering anybody. We are simply requesting under a
very normal procedure for the transfer of somebody.

"I would simply appeal for calm and reasonableness at a moment when we don't
need to raise the level of confrontation over something as frankly basic and
normal as this."

Mr Kerry's Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov, wasn't buying the new tone. "We
consider the attempts to accuse Russia of violations of US laws and even some
sort of conspiracy which, on top of all that, are accompanied by threats, as
absolutely ungrounded and unacceptable," Mr Lavrov told reporters in Moscow.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Deep cover: Could this sleeper at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport
be Edward Snowden? Photo: Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              412 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Putin tells Snowden to get going

BYLINE: PAUL SONNE, MOSCOW

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 661  words


FUGITIVE whistleblower Edward Snowden appeared to be stuck yesterday in a bleak
Moscow airport terminal, with Russian President Vladimir Putin urging him to get
on his way.

Mr Putin shot down a request by US officials to expel Mr Snowden, 30, a National
Security Agency contractor wanted by US authorities for leaking information
about domestic surveillance operations.

The Russian President described Mr Snowden's arrival in Moscow on a Sunday
flight from Hong Kong as a ``complete surprise'' and said he remained in the
airport's transit zone.

``Mr Snowden is a free man and the sooner he chooses his final destination, the
better it will be for us and him,'' he said during an official trip to Finland.

Asked about handing Mr Snowden to US authorities, Mr Putin noted there was no
extradition agreement between Russia and the US. Mr Snowden had not crossed
Russia's border and was in a ``transit hall'' for passengers with layovers, he
said.

Mr Putin's comments broke nearly two days of official obfuscation among Russian
authorities about Mr Snowden's whereabouts and heightened the drama in a global
showdown that involves the US, Russia, China and a former Booz Allen Hamilton
contractor who is now one of America's most high-profile fugitives.

``While we do not have an extradition treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a
clear legal basis to expel Mr Snowden, based on the status of his travel
documents and the pending charges against him,'' said White House National
Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden.

But just as Mr Putin urged Mr Snowden to leave Moscow, the anti-secrecy group
that has been guiding his escape from US authorities cast doubt on whether the
fugitive has an exit route.

WikiLeaks had said Mr Snowden was on his way to Ecuador via ``Russia and other
countries''. But he failed to board a flight to Havana on which airline
employees said he was booked. ``Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying
intermediary countries may keep Snowden permanently in Russia,'' read a message
on WikiLeaks's Twitter account.

An extended stay in Moscow would echo the experience of Australian Julian
Assange, the WikiLeaks' founder who received asylum from Ecuador last year. For
more than a year, Assange has been holed up in the Ecuadorean embassy in London,
beyond the reach of British authorities that want to extradite him to Sweden on
sexual assault charges he says are fabricated.

There are no direct commercial flights between Russia and Ecuador. The
whistleblower could conceivably travel through Venezuela or Cuba. But Cuba's
Raul Castro is hoping to increase tourism from the US and may not be eager to
have him pass through.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro said his government would evaluate a formal
request for political asylum from Mr Snowden if one came because he ``deserves
it''.

On state television during a visit to Haiti, Mr Maduro said: ``This guy Snowden
has given the world a surprise and he's made complaints to make humanity
better.''

The US has said it has contacted Ecuador to ask it to deny Mr Snowden's asylum
request. The Ecuadorean government online newspaper, El Ciudadano, said the US
communication had been verbal and that Quito had asked the US for a written
request.

Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa is likely to grant the asylum request even in
the face of US retaliation that could take forms such as freezing Ecuadorean
officials' bank accounts and travel visas or sanctioning Ecuadorean exports,
said Bruce Bagley, chair of the international studies department at the
University of Miami.

``Snowden's chance of getting asylum in Ecuador is as good as it can get given
the history of resentment, tension and lack of respect between the two
countries,'' he said. ``Correa is . . . inclined to stick his finger in the eye
of the US.''

The setting for the cat-and-mouse drama around Mr Snowden has emerged as
Sheremetyevo Airport, on Moscow's outskirts. It has direct flights to anumber of
capitals hostile to the US.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              413 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                 BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Russian TV talk show looks at US whistleblower Snowden affair

LENGTH: 551 words


Russian official state television channel Rossiya 1 has aired a talk show
devoted to the US whistleblower Edward Snowden. The talk show entitled
"Seventeen Moments of Agent Snowden" was shown in the "Pryamoy Efir" ("Live on
Air") programme on 27 June.

The show's host Boris Korchevnikov opened it by saying: "Moscow. Sheremetyevo.
Terminal-E. It is now here that the centre of world history is. The media of the
whole world are besieging the airport's inaccessible transit zone to find traces
of Edward Snowden, an agent of the most secretive American special service, the
National Security Agency, the NSA."

Korchevnikov then outlined some of the revelations made by Snowden about the
NSA's Prism internet surveillance scheme and the British surveillance programme,
Tempora. He said that "it looks like Snowden has declared war on Big Brother"
and put the following question for the show: "Where is he?"

The guests in the studio included the director-general of the national anticrime
and antiterrorist foundation, retired KGB Col Oleg Nechiporenko; writer and
columnist Nikolay Starikov; the editor in chief of the National Defence
magazine, Igor Korotchenko; A Just Russia party MP Aleksey Mitrofanov; retired
Lt-Gen of the FSB (Federal Security Service) Aleksandr Zdanovich; Life News
correspondent Zhanna Karpenko; journalist Maksim Kononenko; a member of the
Russian Public Chamber, director-general of the Institute for Foreign Policy
Research and Initiatives Veronika Krasheninnikova; radio presenter Anna Shafran;
journalist Yekaterina Zorina and others.

Oleg Nechiporenko described Snowden's actions as a "legal deed", a "moral deed"
and as a "world outlook deed". He also questioned Snowden's former employers who
allowed such a person to work for them.

Igor Korotchenko said that in his opinion Snowden was an "idealist" and that he
was no-one's agent. He added that he did not think that Snowden had received any
money from anyone for his disclosures.

Retired Lt-Gen of the FSB Aleksandr Zdanovich said that Snowden's personality
was not interesting, but his revelations were. He said that they were hard proof
of the existence of the global US surveillance programme. Zdanovich agreed with
President Putin's statement that Snowden's arrival in Moscow had been a
"surprise".

Veronika Krasheninnikova said that "If he (Snowden) cannot be found now, it is
better for him and it is, in fact, better for the cause." Prompted to explain
what "cause" she meant, Krasheninnikova said: "the good cause". She also called
for an international investigation into the US surveillance programme and added
that Russian human rights activists should defend Snowden.

Korotchenko also called for an investigation into "instances of illegal
cyber-spying" revealed by Snowden.

The whole discussion was rather lively but the guests failed to provide any
clear indication as to where Snowden might be at the moment. Journalist
Yekaterina Zorina, who has visited the capsule hotel in the transit zone of
Sheremetyevo airport, where Snowden is believed to have spent some time, said
that having talked to a receptionist there she got the impression that the
receptionist know something about Snowden.

(The talk show lasted 63 minutes. No further processing is planned.)

Source: Rossiya 1 TV, Moscow, in Russian 1430 gmt 27 Jun 13

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2013 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              414 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                      June 27, 2013 Thursday 12:16 PM GMT

US 'got leaker's middle name wrong'

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 440 words


Hong Kong officials say the US government got National Security Agency leaker
Edward Snowden's middle name wrong in documents it submitted to back a request
for his arrest.

Mr Snowden hid in Hong Kong for several weeks after revealing secret US
surveillance programs. Hong Kong allowed him to fly to Moscow on Sunday, saying
the request for his arrest did not fully comply with its requirements.

Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen said that discrepancies in the paperwork filed by
US authorities were to blame, although the US Justice Department denied that.

Mr Yuen said Hong Kong immigration records listed Mr Snowden's middle name as
Joseph, but the US government used the name James in some documents and referred
to him only as Edward J Snowden in others.

"These three names are not exactly the same, therefore we believed that there
was a need to clarify," he said. Mr Yuen said authorities also did not provide
Snowden's passport number. The decision to let Mr Snowden leave Hong Kong
angered the White House, which said it damaged US-Chinese relations.

The Justice Department rejected the notion Hong Kong had required clarification
about Mr Snowden's middle name - or that it needed his passport number, saying
the US had provided to Hong Kong all that was required under the terms of their
extradition treaty.

"The fugitive's photos and videos were widely reported through multiple news
outlets. That Hong Kong would ask for more information about his identity
demonstrates that it was simply trying to create a pretext for not acting on the
provisional arrest request," a spokeswoman said.

Mr Yuen said the confusion over Mr Snowden's identification and his passport
were among factors that delayed an arrest. He said the government requested
clarification from its counterparts in the US on Friday.

"Up until the moment of Snowden's departure, the very minute, the US Department
of Justice did not reply to our request for further information. Therefore, in
our legal system, there is no legal basis for the requested provisional arrest
warrant," Mr Yuen said. In the absence of such a warrant, the "Hong Kong
government has no legal basis for restricting or prohibiting Snowden leaving
Hong Kong."

Mr Snowden flew from Hong Kong to Moscow and was expected to seek asylum in
Ecuador. Mystery surrounds his whereabout after Russian President Vladimir Putin
said that Mr Snowden was in the transit area of Sheremetyevo Airport. Mr Putin
said he had not passed through immigration and was free to go where he liked.
Hordes of journalists armed with laptops and photo and video cameras have camped
in and around the airport, looking for Mr Snowden.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2013 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              415 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                          SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION

Snowden in '09: Shoot leakers!

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 324 words


EDWARD SNOWDEN wasn't always a crusader for government transparency.

While working as a CIA technician stationed in Geneva, Snowden said people who
leak information to the press should be "shot in the balls."

Snowden was reacting to a 2009 report in The New York Times regarding top-secret
discussions between the U.S. and Israel about Iran's nuclear program. He signed
onto the tech news site Ars Technica and vented his outrage.

"WTF NY TIMES?" he wrote in a chat reprinted on the website Wednesday. "Are they
TRYING to start a war? Jesus Christ. They're like WikiLeaks."

Another user in the forum replied, "They're just reporting, dude."

But Snowden, writing under his handle TheTrueHOOHA, wasn't buying it.

"They're reporting classified s---.

"Who the f--- are the anonymous sources telling them this? Those people should
be shot in the balls."

Four years later, Snowden, 30, would leak a series of top-secret National
Security Agency documents that revealed the U.S. government collects data on
essentially all Americans' phone calls and has access to the servers of nine
major Internet companies through a program called Prism.

Snowden has been in Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport since Sunday, as Ecuadoran
officials were reviewing his application for asylum. The review could take as
long as two months.

Meanwhile, officials in Hong Kong explained why they let Snowden travel to
Moscow despite his passport being revoked and a written request from the U.S. to
detain him.

The city's immigration records listed Snowden's middle name as Joseph, but the
U.S. government used the name James in some documents and referred to him only
as Edward J. Snowden in others.

U.S. authorities did not provide Snowden's passport number, Hong Kong officials
said. They asked for clarification and let him travel when the U.S. Department
of Justice didn't reply to their request for further information, said Hong Kong
Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen.

With News Wire Services

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NLVL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


                              416 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Snowden may face months of limbo over asylum claim: Ecuador cautious over
decision on whistleblower Damage to trade ties with US a risk, admits minister

BYLINE: Miriam Elder in Moscow

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 610 words


Ecuador has said it could take months to decide whether to grant asylum to
Edward Snowden, potentially confining the US whistleblower to the halls of a
Russian airport for weeks to come.

Ricardo Patino, Ecuador's foreign minister, said Snowden's case was similar to
that of the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, who has been granted asylum at
the country's embassy in London.

"It took us two months to make a decision in the case of Assange, so do not
expect us to make a decision sooner this time," Patino said on a visit to
Malaysia. He said Ecuador would "consider all the risks", including concerns
that asylum could harm trade ties with the US.

Sander Levin, a US congressman, told The Hill newspaper yesterday that if
Ecuador granted Snowden asylum there was no "basis for even discussing"
extending a trade deal up for renewal in July.

Snowden fled Hong Kong on Sunday after leaking secret documents revealing US
surveillance programmes.

Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, confirmed on Tuesday that Snowden had
arrived in Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport and was waiting in its transit area.

An anonymous source told the news agency Interfax that Snowden lacked documents
that would let him travel. "(His) US passport has been cancelled, he has no
other identification documents. So he's required to stay in Sheremetyevo's
transit zone, since he can't leave Russia or buy a ticket."

The official Twitter site for WikiLeaks also proposed that Snowden would be tied
to the Moscow airport for the foreseeable future. "Cancelling Snowden's passport
and bullying intermediary countries may keep Snowden permanently in Russia."
Commentators also denied that Snowden was co-operating with the Federal Security
Service, following Putin's similar denial on Tuesday. "Mr Snowden is not being
'debriefed' by the FSB," the group said, adding that he was well.

Yet Snowden lost a supporter yesterday when the Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon
declined to represent him. Snowden has been charged under the espionage act for
gathering and leaking classified material.

Russian officials have been lining up to throw their support behind Snowden
since he first landed in Moscow on Sunday.

Yesterday, Alexey Pushkov, head of the Duma's international affairs committee,
said: "Assange, (Bradley) Manning, and Snowden were not spies and didn't give up
secret information for money but out of conviction. They are the new dissidents,
fighters of the system."

Russia's embrace of Snowden stands in stark contrast to its own record on human
rights and treatment of whistleblowers.

Putin and his foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, have lashed out at the US for
demanding Snowden's extradition and implying Russian involvement in his flight.
Putin presented Snowden as just another transiting passenger.

Meanwhile, Andrei Soldatov, an expert on Russia's security services, said: "I
don't think he's just wandering around. It seems he is hiding . . . or they are
hiding him." Russia might not accept him permanently, he said. "In this case, it
would be impossible to say he was not briefed by the FSB."

Reverberations continued in Europe after Snowden's revelations about British
electronic eavesdropping. The Council of Europe took issue with attempts by the
UK foreign secretary, William Hague, to play down the impact of the disclosures.

"Privacy is a fundamental human right which is essential. It cannot be forfeited
so easily," Nils Muiznieks, the council's commissioner for human rights, wrote
in a commentary for the Guardian.

Captions:

A television in a cafe at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport shows Edward Snowden,
who is thought to be in a transit zone at the terminal Photograph: AP/Sergei
Grits

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              417 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             Herald Sun (Australia)

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

Putin won't hand over 'free man' Snowden confirmed in Moscow

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 451  words


YES, he's at a Moscow airport and, no, you can't have him.

Russian President Vladimir Putin's official acknowledgment that National
Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden was in Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, and
his rejection of US pleas to turn him over, have increased tension between the
two nations.

Mr Snowden is charged with violating American espionage laws. He fled Hong Kong
on the weekend, triggering a global guessing game over his whereabouts and
frustrating US efforts to bring him to justice.

Mr Putin described the ex-intelligence contractor as a ``free man'' whose
arrival in Russia was ``completely unexpected''.

The announcement ended two days of speculation over where Mr Snowden could be.
Mr Snowden leaked revelations of massive US surveillance programs to the media
and is now wanted by the US authorities.

He was supposed to go to Ecuador -- where President Rafael Correa is considering
his request for asylum -- via Russia and then Cuba.

``It is true that Mr Snowden came to Moscow,'' Mr Putin said during a visit to
Finland. ``For us, this was completely unexpected.

``He arrived as a transit passenger and he does not need a visa or other
documents. He can buy a ticket and go wherever he pleases. He did not cross the
state border, as a transit passenger he is still in the transit hall . . . Mr
Snowden is a free man, the sooner he selects his final destination point, the
better for us and for himself.''

Mr Snowden, 30, is a former CIA employee who later was hired as a contractor for
the NSA, where he gained access to documents he gave to the Guardian and
Washington Post newspapers. The papers exposed what Mr Snowden said were privacy
violations by an authoritarian government.

Mr Snowden also told Hong Kong's South China Morning Post newspaper that ``the
NSA does all kinds of things like hack Chinese cellphone companies to steal all
of your SMS data''. He is believed to have more than 200 additional sensitive
documents in laptops he is carrying.

Speculation has been rife that Russian security services have been talking to Mr
Snowden and may want to keep him in Russia for a more thorough debriefing, but
Mr Putin denied it.

The White House again asked Russia to help US authorities capture Mr Snowden --
but stopped far short of threatening a detente if he escapes.

It's a turnabout from earlier tough talk against China for letting Mr Snowden
flee Hong Kong instead of sending him to the US to face espionage charges for
revealing classified national security surveillance programs.

``We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice,'' Secretary of State John Kerry said.

``We're not looking for a confrontation. We are not ordering anybody.''

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DHS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              418 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                      June 27, 2013 Thursday 12:25 PM GMT

US authorities got NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden's middle name wrong on
extradition request, says Hong Kong;
US complains Hong Kong was 'simply trying to create a pretext for not acting on
the provisional arrest request'

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 508 words


Hong Kong officials say the US government got National Security Agency leaker
Edward Snowden's middle name wrong in documents it submitted to back a request
for his arrest.

Mr Snowden hid in Hong Kong for several weeks after revealing secret US
surveillance programs. Hong Kong allowed him to fly to Moscow on Sunday, saying
the request for his arrest did not fully comply with its requirements.

Justice Secretary Rimsky Yuen said that discrepancies in the paperwork filed by
US authorities were to blame, although the US Justice Department denied that.

Mr Yuen said Hong Kong immigration records listed Mr Snowden's middle name as
Joseph, but the US government used the name James in some documents and referred
to him only as Edward J Snowden in others.

"These three names are not exactly the same, therefore we believed that there
was a need to clarify," he said. Mr Yuen said authorities also did not provide
Snowden's passport number.

The decision to let Mr Snowden leave Hong Kong angered the White House, which
said it damaged US-Chinese relations.

The Justice Department rejected the notion Hong Kong had required clarification
about Mr Snowden's middle name - or that it needed his passport number, saying
the US had provided to Hong Kong all that was required under the terms of their
extradition treaty.

"The fugitive's photos and videos were widely reported through multiple news
outlets. That Hong Kong would ask for more information about his identity
demonstrates that it was simply trying to create a pretext for not acting on the
provisional arrest request," a spokeswoman said.

Mr Yuen said the confusion over Mr Snowden's identification and his passport
were among factors that delayed an arrest. He said the government requested
clarification from its counterparts in the US on Friday.

"Up until the moment of Snowden's departure, the very minute, the US Department
of Justice did not reply to our request for further information. Therefore, in
our legal system, there is no legal basis for the requested provisional arrest
warrant," Mr Yuen said. In the absence of such a warrant, the "Hong Kong
government has no legal basis for restricting or prohibiting Snowden leaving
Hong Kong."

Mr Snowden flew from Hong Kong to Moscow and was expected to seek asylum in
Ecuador.

Mystery surrounds his whereabout after Russian President Vladimir Putin said
that Mr Snowden was in the transit area of Sheremetyevo Airport. Mr Putin said
he had not passed through immigration and was free to go where he liked.

He booked a seat on a Havana-bound flight on Monday en route to Venezuela, but
did not board the plane. His ultimate destination was believed to be Ecuador.

But the US move to annul Mr Snowden's passport may have severely complicated his
travel plans. Exiting the transit area would require either boarding a plane or
passing through border control, both of which require a valid passport or other
documentation.

Hordes of journalists armed with laptops and photo and video cameras have camped
in and around the airport, looking for Mr Snowden.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              419 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Stranger than fiction;
Meanwhile

BYLINE: BY ALEX BERENSON

SECTION: EDIT; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 830 words

ABSTRACT

Edward J. Snowden's story is the stuff of fiction. But he's real, and his plans
to live happily ever after were optimistic at best.

FULL TEXT

For a spy novelist like me, the Edward J. Snowden story has everything. A man
driven by ego and idealism - can anyone ever distinguish the two? - leaves his
job and his beautiful girlfriend behind. He must tell the world the Panopticon
has arrived. His masters vow to punish him, and he heads for Moscow in a
desperate search for refuge. In reality he's found the world's most dangerous
place to be a dissident, where power is a knife blade and a sprinkle of
polonium. For now he's safe. He's of use to his new Russian friends. But if they
change their minds ...

I wish I'd written it. But Snowden is real, not a character. And I am sorry to
watch his true life unraveling.

Two weeks ago his case had a whiff of farce. Despite all the huggle-muggle about
his initial revelations, anyone who has been paying attention knows that the
National Security Agency is colonoscopy-deep in the world's electronic
communications. In my novels, characters assume that every e-mail they send will
be seen and every phone call heard.

What Snowden at first seemed to want - and rightly - was to force America's
electronic spies to answer, in plain English, are you saving e-mails, Skype and
other Internet communications? What about phone calls? For how long? Who can get
access to this data? How are calls between Americans treated? Et cetera.  The
answers to all those questions remain murky.

So Snowden seemed to have done the world a service. But in the last week both he
and his former employers have misplayed their hands, and his story has become
far trickier. Snowden did not start out as a spy, and calling him one bends the
term past recognition. Spies don't give their secrets to journalists for free.

Did he think he would be seen as a hero? Maybe. At least, as The New York
Times's Keith Bradsher reported Monday, he seems to have believed he would be
allowed to stay quietly in Hong Kong while the world digested his revelations.

Given the Obama administration's record of pursuing leakers, Snowden's plans to
live happily ever after were optimistic, at best. In fact, the fury from
Washington and the intelligence community knew no bounds. Representative Peter
T. King, Republican of New York, a late if enthusiastic convert to the
antiterrorism cause, called Snowden a ''defector.'' Senator Bill Nelson, a
Florida Democrat, said Snowden had committed ''treason.'' Federal prosecutors
prepared a sealed (naturally) indictment. The White House asked Hong Kong to
repatriate Snowden - and, unbelievably, seemed to think its extradition request
would be handled like any other. We'll just fax the papers, and you ship him to
county, O.K., sheriff?

Faced with the prospect of decades in prison, Snowden panicked. Instead of
waiting for the territory or its masters in Beijing to decide his fate, he
packed his laptops and headed for Moscow. Now he gets to see a soft dictatorship
(such a lovely phrase) up close. On Sunday, the willful naïfs from WikiLeaks who
are ''helping'' Snowden said that Sheremetyevo airport would simply be a
stopover. But why would the Russian government let him go before it has squeezed
him dry? In interviews, Snowden has said he has plenty of secrets left on his
hard drives, and there's no reason to doubt him.

Snowden has put himself in a terrible spot. Moscow will surely protect him for
as long as it feels like irritating Washington. But by the time the Russians are
finished sifting through his laptops, he'll be their spy, whether or not he
meant to be. Beijing may have already pulled the same trick; some intelligence
officers believe that Chinese spy agencies copied Snowden's hard drives during
his Hong Kong stay.

America treated a whistle-blower like a traitor - and thus made him a traitor.
Great job. Did anyone in the White House or the N.S.A or the C.I.A. consider
flying to Hong Kong and treating Snowden like a human being, offering him a
chance to testify before Congress and a fair trial? Maybe he would have gone
with President Vladimir V. Putin anyway, but at least he would have had another
option. The secret keepers would have won too: A Congressional hearing would
have been a small price to bring Snowden and those precious hard drives back to
American soil.

It's hard not to see the last couple of weeks as a tragedy for Snowden - who
seems to have started down this road with decent motives and is now looking at
life as an exile or in prison - as well as a huge self-inflicted wound for the
American intelligence community. If the masters of the apparatus were really
ready to have an honest discussion about their powers, Snowden might have wound
up not in Moscow, but back in Washington, his girl by his side on the Capitol
steps, headed for a few years in prison and then a job with the Electronic
Frontier Foundation.

That would have been the Hollywood ending. Real life is tougher.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: a former reporter for The New York Times, is the author of seven novels,
including ''The Faithful Spy,'' winner of the Edgar Award. His most recent novel
is ''The Night Ranger.''

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              420 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Ecuador has a suggestion for Snowden;
Its Moscow embassy might be more comfy while officials weigh his asylum request.

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko, Richard A. Serrano

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


Edward Snowden's request for political asylum in Ecuador could take up to two
months to approve, the country's foreign minister said Wednesday, and he
suggested that the U.S. fugitive could end his airport-layover limbo by seeking
sanctuary inside the Ecuadorean Embassy here.

Snowden has not been officially admitted to Russia and remains in the
Sheremetyevo airport's "transit zone."

Russian President Vladimir Putin has encouraged him to hurry up and leave.
Snowden might be able to make it to the South American nation's embassy -- about
a 20-minute ride at night when traffic thins out -- under the diplomatic
protection of the ambassador's car.

"If he goes to the embassy, we will make a decision," said Ricardo Patino,
Ecuador's foreign minister.

Patino, speaking during a visit to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, noted that such an
arrangement would make Snowden's plight similar to that of WikiLeaks founder
Julian Assange. For more than a year, Assange has remained at the Ecuadorean
Embassy in London after fleeing a sexual assault investigation in Sweden and
possible extradition to the United States in connection with leaks of classified
information.

"We're still studying it," Patino said of Snowden's asylum application. "It took
us two months to make a decision in the case of Assange, so do not expect us to
make a decision sooner than that." He later tweeted: "The decision on asylum
could be resolved in a day, a week or, as happened with Assange, it could take
two months."

Wednesday's intrigue in Moscow also included increased speculation that Snowden
had left the airport area and was with Russian intelligence officials at
Lubyanka, site of the Federal Security Service headquarters. From there it is a
much shorter drive to the embassy, and the Ecuadorean ambassador's car has been
spotted outside Lubyanka twice in the last two days.

Snowden, 30, was a contract analyst in Hawaii for the National Security Agency.
He has acknowledged that he leaked data to British and U.S. newspapers about
secret surveillance programs to collect domestic phone records and monitor
Internet data. He then fled to Hong Kong.

The United States revoked his passport and filed a request to extradite him, but
Hong Kong was still reviewing the request when Snowden flew to Moscow on Sunday.

Putin said Tuesday that Snowden was a free man who had broken no laws in Russia
and that Russia had no legal obligation to extradite him to the United States.

White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said Wednesday that the United States
continued to seek a way to have Snowden detained and brought back, and that U.S.
officials believe he is still at the airport.

"We are asking the Russians to expel Mr. Snowden," Carney said, "and we believe
there is a clear, legal basis to do so, based on his travel documents and the
indictment against him."

But the upper house of Russia's parliament voted to create a special group of
lawmakers to investigate whether the U.S. is violating Snowden's rights by
pursuing him on espionage charges. "Snowden is driven into the corner now," said
lawmaker Ruslan Gattarov, who led the call for the investigation. He said
lawmakers had already requested information about the criminal case but "we have
simply been ignored."

In Washington, Ambassador Efrain Baus, deputy chief of mission at the Ecuadorean
Embassy, said Snowden's asylum request "will be reviewed responsibly, as are the
many other asylum applications that Ecuador receives each year."

Ecuador has asked the United States to submit "its position regarding this
applicant in writing so that it can be taken into consideration as part of our
thorough review process," Baus said. He also noted that "this current situation
is not being provoked by Ecuador."

Patrick Ventrell, a State Department spokesman, declined to say whether the
United States would provide written statements. "I'm not going to get into our
diplomatic exchanges with Ecuador," he said.

"From our perspective, Mr. Snowden's crimes are not political. They are serious
felony offenses in the United States."

--

sergio.loiko@latimes.com

richard.serrano@latimes.com

Special correspondents Chris Kraul and Pablo Jaramillo Viteri in Quito, Ecuador,
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              443 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Looking for Snowden in 'The Terminal'

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1592 words


SHEREMETYEVO - A burlesque of Steven Spielberg's The Terminal is being staged in
Terminal E of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport. Hordes of journalists flocked to
the airport in the last several days hoping to find Edward Snowden, the NSA
whistleblower who emerged into the global spotlight after revealing information
on the U.S. surveillance program, and then disappeared.

WHEN REALITY IS FUNNIER THAN FICTION

In Steven Spielberg's famous 2004 film The Terminal, an unfortunate traveler
from a fictitious Balkan state seeks to enter U.S. territory only to find upon
arrival in New York that his homeland has ceased to exist due to a civil war,
and his visa is no longer valid. Tom Hanks' character becomes an eyesore for JFK
officials, who can't solve his problem, and as a result he gets stuck in the
airport for nine months.

In the real world, similar stories tend to play out in a different, often even
more incredible manner. Unlike the movie, the main character, former CIA
employee Edward Snowden, has no intention whatsoever to reach the U.S., where he
has been labeled a traitor. Just like in the movie, American authorities
annulled his passport. So while powerful men sort out his fate, Snowden is stuck
in Terminal E of Sheremetyevo Airport. So far, despite the frenzy, no one has
been able to spot the fugitive.

For the last several days, Terminal E has been witnessing the unfolding of an
international political thriller. It all started on June 23, when Snowden flew
into Moscow from Hong Kong, where he was hiding from U.S. authorities after
revealing secret information, which defied the boldest fantasies of conspiracy
theorists on the government's ability to control minds. According to Snowden's
leaks, U.S. and British intelligence services have access to almost all mobile
phone calls and email on the planet. In order to shed some light on these
bloodcurdling secret practices, Snowden even gave up his annual salary of
$200,000 and a home in Hawaii.

Having been branded as a traitor in the U.S., Snowden said he would seek
political asylum in Latin America or Iceland, which of course has a long track
record of supporting freedom of speech. It is for that reason that he boarded in
Hong Kong a Moscow-bound flight, initially planning to transit to a third
destination.

LOOKING FOR SNOWDEN

However, no one actually saw Snowden in Moscow. It was unclear whether he had
actually arrived, although unnamed sources confirmed that he did. The fugitive
agent is said to have checked into the V-Express capsule hotel in Terminal E,
instantly making it the place to be for any journalist worth his salt. Reporters
immediately booked all available rooms in hopes of a glimpse of the celebrity.

Hotel staff appeared to have been under strict orders not to discuss Snowden's
whereabouts. Nevertheless, when a RIA Novosti reporter checked into the hotel
under the guise of an ordinary traveler, a female hotel employee confirmed that
the U.S. fugitive had indeed appeared at the hotel on June 23, the day he flew
into Moscow. Since the reception desk doesn't have the means to verify whether
his American passport is valid, he could have even used it for registration. But
after a few hours at the hotel, he was reportedly gone.

This reporter even took a walk through the dark corridors of the V-Express hotel
calling Snowden's name, only to see the bewildered faces of fellow journalists.
It was a shady facility, where half of the 66 rooms had no windows, although
every single one is equipped with a shower and a TV set. Apart from the exit
door, the hotel corridors end with several locked doors which could have been
used for undetected escape.

ANOTHER MOVIE ANALOGY

Snowden's travels were complicated by the fact that by the time he reached
Sheremetyevo's transit zone, his documents were no longer valid. The U.S.
authorities decided to cancel his passport when he was just about to fly into
Moscow. In order to continue his journey, he needs to receive transit documents
from any state that is willing to do this, taking into account that any such
move will be perceived by the U.S. as an act of political defiance. A refugee
document of passage could have been a solution, with Wikileaks founder Julian
Assange claiming that Ecuador issued them to Snowden. But the Ecuadorian Foreign
Ministry did not confirm this.

Under Russian laws, a passenger connecting from one international flight to
another can stay in the transit zone for up to 24 hours. After that, he or she
has to apply for a transit visa. RIA Novosti's sources claim that Snowden could
have applied for it, since Russia's Foreign Ministry has a consular desk in the
airport. But it was unclear what document Snowden could have used for this
purpose, since his U.S. passport has been canceled.

This catch-22 takes us back to The Terminal once again. Documents carried by the
film's main character show an incomprehensible Cyrillic inscription,
'[#x415][#x429][#x42c] [#x420][#x424][#x422][#x41b][#x42b],' but when he
approaches a border officer making another attempt to enter the U.S., he holds a
Belarus-style driver's license issued to a certain Gulina Gulnar Nazirovna.

SO WHERE IS MR SNOWDEN?

Sheremetyevo's transit zone covers a huge area with 24-hour cafes and duty free
outlets overcrowded with vacationers. Finding Snowden is also complicated by the
fact that terminals E, F, and D have a single transit zone. It takes thirty
minutes to walk the whole area from one end to another, while inspecting every
single corner would take hours.

But journalists are anything but time-strapped. They spend their time wandering
in the secret passages of the transit zone, peering futilely into the faces of
other passengers.

'Never saw such a frenzy. Don't you have anything better to do besides hanging
out here day and night?' a well-dressed passenger on his way to Amsterdam said.

The search for Snowden is also complicated by the fact that apart from the
capsule hotel and numerous chairs, the transit zone has a number of restricted
premises, where Snowden could be awaiting his fate in reasonable comfort. These
include several business lounges and, more importantly, a vast territory
controled by Russia's Federal Security Service (the FSB). Each door leading to
the territory has a sign saying 'Area of additional security restrictions of
Russia's Federal Security Service. Access on case-by-case basis only.' Violators
are subject to a fine of 1,000 rubles.

After ringing the doorbell of one such door, this RIA Novosti reporter saw a
young border control officer emerge from the inside. He refused to engage in
conversation, and even suggested that journalists would be better off writing
about something else.

A local Burger King serves as a headquarters for the journalists, as if it was
tacitly assumed that if an American were to emerge for lunch he would opt for a
familiar fast food chain. In addition, restaurant customers can see the entire
terminal and its gates. Another scene from The Terminal comes to mind at this
point, since it was in Burger King that the Tom Hanks character buys his first
hamburger in his first truly American experience.

Journalists occupied several tables in the café, covering them with camcorders,
cameras, and laptops with their permanently depleted batteries. But Snowden
never showed up. 'I can't say whether he came here or not. We are serving
hundreds of customers every day, including foreigners,' a girl behind the cash
register said.

And yet, well-built young men would occasionally emerge from nearby FSB premises
to order suspiciously large quantities of hamburgers and fries to go. A
mysterious smile is all that reporters get when they ask whether these meals are
intended for the fugitive American.

By the evening of June 25, enthusiasm among reporters somewhat faded, but was
revived by President Vladimir Putin, who confirmed that Snowden is still in the
transit zone. Putin said that Snowden's arrival was 'completely unexpected.'

ON THE ROAD TO HAVANA

So why Havana? Neither Venezuela nor Ecuador - the two countries willing to
consider Snowden's asylum request - have direct flights from Moscow. Possible
transit routes lie through Europe, where Snowden is likely to be detained, or
through Havana, which is not particularly friendly towards the U.S.

Snowden registered on Cuba-bound flights twice on June 24 and 25. About three
dozen Russian and foreign journalists registered for the first flight as well,
and had to leave for the island of freedom without Snowden, passing the lengthy
hours onboard a transatlantic flight filming video reports of an empty seat 17A,
where Snowden was registered. Someone started a Twitter account of the empty
seat, with tweets mostly complaining of excessive intrusiveness by journalists.
'I feel empty,' the seat's account said, adding that 'The Man Who Wasn't There'
was being shown during the flight.

After this, media companies became reluctant to spend money on expensive tickets
and limited their efforts to a 24-hour vigil in the transit zone. Access there
is available to those who have a ticket and a boarding pass for an international
flight, which prompted journalists to come up with a clever way of getting there
without actually taking a flight. The solution is to buy a ticket for a cheap
international flight, such as to Kiev or Minsk, which costs 4,000 rubles. That's
what this RIA Novosti reporter did. He registered for the 17A seat, went through
all border control procedures and is now in the transit zone. All he has left to
do is find Snowden.

To be continued....

This text originally appeared in Russian on www.ria.ru

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              493 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Looking for Snowden in 'The Terminal'

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1592 words


SHEREMETYEVO - A burlesque of Steven Spielberg's The Terminal is being staged in
Terminal E of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport. Hordes of journalists flocked to
the airport in the last several days hoping to find Edward Snowden, the NSA
whistleblower who emerged into the global spotlight after revealing information
on the U.S. surveillance program, and then disappeared.

WHEN REALITY IS FUNNIER THAN FICTION

In Steven Spielberg's famous 2004 film The Terminal, an unfortunate traveler
from a fictitious Balkan state seeks to enter U.S. territory only to find upon
arrival in New York that his homeland has ceased to exist due to a civil war,
and his visa is no longer valid. Tom Hanks' character becomes an eyesore for JFK
officials, who can't solve his problem, and as a result he gets stuck in the
airport for nine months.

In the real world, similar stories tend to play out in a different, often even
more incredible manner. Unlike the movie, the main character, former CIA
employee Edward Snowden, has no intention whatsoever to reach the U.S., where he
has been labeled a traitor. Just like in the movie, American authorities
annulled his passport. So while powerful men sort out his fate, Snowden is stuck
in Terminal E of Sheremetyevo Airport. So far, despite the frenzy, no one has
been able to spot the fugitive.

For the last several days, Terminal E has been witnessing the unfolding of an
international political thriller. It all started on June 23, when Snowden flew
into Moscow from Hong Kong, where he was hiding from U.S. authorities after
revealing secret information, which defied the boldest fantasies of conspiracy
theorists on the government's ability to control minds. According to Snowden's
leaks, U.S. and British intelligence services have access to almost all mobile
phone calls and email on the planet. In order to shed some light on these
bloodcurdling secret practices, Snowden even gave up his annual salary of
$200,000 and a home in Hawaii.

Having been branded as a traitor in the U.S., Snowden said he would seek
political asylum in Latin America or Iceland, which of course has a long track
record of supporting freedom of speech. It is for that reason that he boarded in
Hong Kong a Moscow-bound flight, initially planning to transit to a third
destination.

LOOKING FOR SNOWDEN

However, no one actually saw Snowden in Moscow. It was unclear whether he had
actually arrived, although unnamed sources confirmed that he did. The fugitive
agent is said to have checked into the V-Express capsule hotel in Terminal E,
instantly making it the place to be for any journalist worth his salt. Reporters
immediately booked all available rooms in hopes of a glimpse of the celebrity.

Hotel staff appeared to have been under strict orders not to discuss Snowden's
whereabouts. Nevertheless, when a RIA Novosti reporter checked into the hotel
under the guise of an ordinary traveler, a female hotel employee confirmed that
the U.S. fugitive had indeed appeared at the hotel on June 23, the day he flew
into Moscow. Since the reception desk doesn't have the means to verify whether
his American passport is valid, he could have even used it for registration. But
after a few hours at the hotel, he was reportedly gone.

This reporter even took a walk through the dark corridors of the V-Express hotel
calling Snowden's name, only to see the bewildered faces of fellow journalists.
It was a shady facility, where half of the 66 rooms had no windows, although
every single one is equipped with a shower and a TV set. Apart from the exit
door, the hotel corridors end with several locked doors which could have been
used for undetected escape.

ANOTHER MOVIE ANALOGY

Snowden's travels were complicated by the fact that by the time he reached
Sheremetyevo's transit zone, his documents were no longer valid. The U.S.
authorities decided to cancel his passport when he was just about to fly into
Moscow. In order to continue his journey, he needs to receive transit documents
from any state that is willing to do this, taking into account that any such
move will be perceived by the U.S. as an act of political defiance. A refugee
document of passage could have been a solution, with Wikileaks founder Julian
Assange claiming that Ecuador issued them to Snowden. But the Ecuadorian Foreign
Ministry did not confirm this.

Under Russian laws, a passenger connecting from one international flight to
another can stay in the transit zone for up to 24 hours. After that, he or she
has to apply for a transit visa. RIA Novosti's sources claim that Snowden could
have applied for it, since Russia's Foreign Ministry has a consular desk in the
airport. But it was unclear what document Snowden could have used for this
purpose, since his U.S. passport has been canceled.

This catch-22 takes us back to The Terminal once again. Documents carried by the
film's main character show an incomprehensible Cyrillic inscription,
'[#x415][#x429][#x42c] [#x420][#x424][#x422][#x41b][#x42b],' but when he
approaches a border officer making another attempt to enter the U.S., he holds a
Belarus-style driver's license issued to a certain Gulina Gulnar Nazirovna.

SO WHERE IS MR SNOWDEN?

Sheremetyevo's transit zone covers a huge area with 24-hour cafes and duty free
outlets overcrowded with vacationers. Finding Snowden is also complicated by the
fact that terminals E, F, and D have a single transit zone. It takes thirty
minutes to walk the whole area from one end to another, while inspecting every
single corner would take hours.

But journalists are anything but time-strapped. They spend their time wandering
in the secret passages of the transit zone, peering futilely into the faces of
other passengers.

'Never saw such a frenzy. Don't you have anything better to do besides hanging
out here day and night?' a well-dressed passenger on his way to Amsterdam said.

The search for Snowden is also complicated by the fact that apart from the
capsule hotel and numerous chairs, the transit zone has a number of restricted
premises, where Snowden could be awaiting his fate in reasonable comfort. These
include several business lounges and, more importantly, a vast territory
controled by Russia's Federal Security Service (the FSB). Each door leading to
the territory has a sign saying 'Area of additional security restrictions of
Russia's Federal Security Service. Access on case-by-case basis only.' Violators
are subject to a fine of 1,000 rubles.

After ringing the doorbell of one such door, this RIA Novosti reporter saw a
young border control officer emerge from the inside. He refused to engage in
conversation, and even suggested that journalists would be better off writing
about something else.

A local Burger King serves as a headquarters for the journalists, as if it was
tacitly assumed that if an American were to emerge for lunch he would opt for a
familiar fast food chain. In addition, restaurant customers can see the entire
terminal and its gates. Another scene from The Terminal comes to mind at this
point, since it was in Burger King that the Tom Hanks character buys his first
hamburger in his first truly American experience.

Journalists occupied several tables in the café, covering them with camcorders,
cameras, and laptops with their permanently depleted batteries. But Snowden
never showed up. 'I can't say whether he came here or not. We are serving
hundreds of customers every day, including foreigners,' a girl behind the cash
register said.

And yet, well-built young men would occasionally emerge from nearby FSB premises
to order suspiciously large quantities of hamburgers and fries to go. A
mysterious smile is all that reporters get when they ask whether these meals are
intended for the fugitive American.

By the evening of June 25, enthusiasm among reporters somewhat faded, but was
revived by President Vladimir Putin, who confirmed that Snowden is still in the
transit zone. Putin said that Snowden's arrival was 'completely unexpected.'

ON THE ROAD TO HAVANA

So why Havana? Neither Venezuela nor Ecuador - the two countries willing to
consider Snowden's asylum request - have direct flights from Moscow. Possible
transit routes lie through Europe, where Snowden is likely to be detained, or
through Havana, which is not particularly friendly towards the U.S.

Snowden registered on Cuba-bound flights twice on June 24 and 25. About three
dozen Russian and foreign journalists registered for the first flight as well,
and had to leave for the island of freedom without Snowden, passing the lengthy
hours onboard a transatlantic flight filming video reports of an empty seat 17A,
where Snowden was registered. Someone started a Twitter account of the empty
seat, with tweets mostly complaining of excessive intrusiveness by journalists.
'I feel empty,' the seat's account said, adding that 'The Man Who Wasn't There'
was being shown during the flight.

After this, media companies became reluctant to spend money on expensive tickets
and limited their efforts to a 24-hour vigil in the transit zone. Access there
is available to those who have a ticket and a boarding pass for an international
flight, which prompted journalists to come up with a clever way of getting there
without actually taking a flight. The solution is to buy a ticket for a cheap
international flight, such as to Kiev or Minsk, which costs 4,000 rubles. That's
what this RIA Novosti reporter did. He registered for the 17A seat, went through
all border control procedures and is now in the transit zone. All he has left to
do is find Snowden.

To be continued....

This text originally appeared in Russian on www.ria.ru

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              523 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Looking for Snowden in 'The Terminal'

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1592 words


SHEREMETYEVO - A burlesque of Steven Spielberg's The Terminal is being staged in
Terminal E of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport. Hordes of journalists flocked to
the airport in the last several days hoping to find Edward Snowden, the NSA
whistleblower who emerged into the global spotlight after revealing information
on the U.S. surveillance program, and then disappeared.

WHEN REALITY IS FUNNIER THAN FICTION

In Steven Spielberg's famous 2004 film The Terminal, an unfortunate traveler
from a fictitious Balkan state seeks to enter U.S. territory only to find upon
arrival in New York that his homeland has ceased to exist due to a civil war,
and his visa is no longer valid. Tom Hanks' character becomes an eyesore for JFK
officials, who can't solve his problem, and as a result he gets stuck in the
airport for nine months.

In the real world, similar stories tend to play out in a different, often even
more incredible manner. Unlike the movie, the main character, former CIA
employee Edward Snowden, has no intention whatsoever to reach the U.S., where he
has been labeled a traitor. Just like in the movie, American authorities
annulled his passport. So while powerful men sort out his fate, Snowden is stuck
in Terminal E of Sheremetyevo Airport. So far, despite the frenzy, no one has
been able to spot the fugitive.

For the last several days, Terminal E has been witnessing the unfolding of an
international political thriller. It all started on June 23, when Snowden flew
into Moscow from Hong Kong, where he was hiding from U.S. authorities after
revealing secret information, which defied the boldest fantasies of conspiracy
theorists on the government's ability to control minds. According to Snowden's
leaks, U.S. and British intelligence services have access to almost all mobile
phone calls and email on the planet. In order to shed some light on these
bloodcurdling secret practices, Snowden even gave up his annual salary of
$200,000 and a home in Hawaii.

Having been branded as a traitor in the U.S., Snowden said he would seek
political asylum in Latin America or Iceland, which of course has a long track
record of supporting freedom of speech. It is for that reason that he boarded in
Hong Kong a Moscow-bound flight, initially planning to transit to a third
destination.

LOOKING FOR SNOWDEN

However, no one actually saw Snowden in Moscow. It was unclear whether he had
actually arrived, although unnamed sources confirmed that he did. The fugitive
agent is said to have checked into the V-Express capsule hotel in Terminal E,
instantly making it the place to be for any journalist worth his salt. Reporters
immediately booked all available rooms in hopes of a glimpse of the celebrity.

Hotel staff appeared to have been under strict orders not to discuss Snowden's
whereabouts. Nevertheless, when a RIA Novosti reporter checked into the hotel
under the guise of an ordinary traveler, a female hotel employee confirmed that
the U.S. fugitive had indeed appeared at the hotel on June 23, the day he flew
into Moscow. Since the reception desk doesn't have the means to verify whether
his American passport is valid, he could have even used it for registration. But
after a few hours at the hotel, he was reportedly gone.

This reporter even took a walk through the dark corridors of the V-Express hotel
calling Snowden's name, only to see the bewildered faces of fellow journalists.
It was a shady facility, where half of the 66 rooms had no windows, although
every single one is equipped with a shower and a TV set. Apart from the exit
door, the hotel corridors end with several locked doors which could have been
used for undetected escape.

ANOTHER MOVIE ANALOGY

Snowden's travels were complicated by the fact that by the time he reached
Sheremetyevo's transit zone, his documents were no longer valid. The U.S.
authorities decided to cancel his passport when he was just about to fly into
Moscow. In order to continue his journey, he needs to receive transit documents
from any state that is willing to do this, taking into account that any such
move will be perceived by the U.S. as an act of political defiance. A refugee
document of passage could have been a solution, with Wikileaks founder Julian
Assange claiming that Ecuador issued them to Snowden. But the Ecuadorian Foreign
Ministry did not confirm this.

Under Russian laws, a passenger connecting from one international flight to
another can stay in the transit zone for up to 24 hours. After that, he or she
has to apply for a transit visa. RIA Novosti's sources claim that Snowden could
have applied for it, since Russia's Foreign Ministry has a consular desk in the
airport. But it was unclear what document Snowden could have used for this
purpose, since his U.S. passport has been canceled.

This catch-22 takes us back to The Terminal once again. Documents carried by the
film's main character show an incomprehensible Cyrillic inscription,
'[#x415][#x429][#x42c] [#x420][#x424][#x422][#x41b][#x42b],' but when he
approaches a border officer making another attempt to enter the U.S., he holds a
Belarus-style driver's license issued to a certain Gulina Gulnar Nazirovna.

SO WHERE IS MR SNOWDEN?

Sheremetyevo's transit zone covers a huge area with 24-hour cafes and duty free
outlets overcrowded with vacationers. Finding Snowden is also complicated by the
fact that terminals E, F, and D have a single transit zone. It takes thirty
minutes to walk the whole area from one end to another, while inspecting every
single corner would take hours.

But journalists are anything but time-strapped. They spend their time wandering
in the secret passages of the transit zone, peering futilely into the faces of
other passengers.

'Never saw such a frenzy. Don't you have anything better to do besides hanging
out here day and night?' a well-dressed passenger on his way to Amsterdam said.

The search for Snowden is also complicated by the fact that apart from the
capsule hotel and numerous chairs, the transit zone has a number of restricted
premises, where Snowden could be awaiting his fate in reasonable comfort. These
include several business lounges and, more importantly, a vast territory
controled by Russia's Federal Security Service (the FSB). Each door leading to
the territory has a sign saying 'Area of additional security restrictions of
Russia's Federal Security Service. Access on case-by-case basis only.' Violators
are subject to a fine of 1,000 rubles.

After ringing the doorbell of one such door, this RIA Novosti reporter saw a
young border control officer emerge from the inside. He refused to engage in
conversation, and even suggested that journalists would be better off writing
about something else.

A local Burger King serves as a headquarters for the journalists, as if it was
tacitly assumed that if an American were to emerge for lunch he would opt for a
familiar fast food chain. In addition, restaurant customers can see the entire
terminal and its gates. Another scene from The Terminal comes to mind at this
point, since it was in Burger King that the Tom Hanks character buys his first
hamburger in his first truly American experience.

Journalists occupied several tables in the café, covering them with camcorders,
cameras, and laptops with their permanently depleted batteries. But Snowden
never showed up. 'I can't say whether he came here or not. We are serving
hundreds of customers every day, including foreigners,' a girl behind the cash
register said.

And yet, well-built young men would occasionally emerge from nearby FSB premises
to order suspiciously large quantities of hamburgers and fries to go. A
mysterious smile is all that reporters get when they ask whether these meals are
intended for the fugitive American.

By the evening of June 25, enthusiasm among reporters somewhat faded, but was
revived by President Vladimir Putin, who confirmed that Snowden is still in the
transit zone. Putin said that Snowden's arrival was 'completely unexpected.'

ON THE ROAD TO HAVANA

So why Havana? Neither Venezuela nor Ecuador - the two countries willing to
consider Snowden's asylum request - have direct flights from Moscow. Possible
transit routes lie through Europe, where Snowden is likely to be detained, or
through Havana, which is not particularly friendly towards the U.S.

Snowden registered on Cuba-bound flights twice on June 24 and 25. About three
dozen Russian and foreign journalists registered for the first flight as well,
and had to leave for the island of freedom without Snowden, passing the lengthy
hours onboard a transatlantic flight filming video reports of an empty seat 17A,
where Snowden was registered. Someone started a Twitter account of the empty
seat, with tweets mostly complaining of excessive intrusiveness by journalists.
'I feel empty,' the seat's account said, adding that 'The Man Who Wasn't There'
was being shown during the flight.

After this, media companies became reluctant to spend money on expensive tickets
and limited their efforts to a 24-hour vigil in the transit zone. Access there
is available to those who have a ticket and a boarding pass for an international
flight, which prompted journalists to come up with a clever way of getting there
without actually taking a flight. The solution is to buy a ticket for a cheap
international flight, such as to Kiev or Minsk, which costs 4,000 rubles. That's
what this RIA Novosti reporter did. He registered for the 17A seat, went through
all border control procedures and is now in the transit zone. All he has left to
do is find Snowden.

To be continued....

This text originally appeared in Russian on www.ria.ru

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              540 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

Looking for Snowden in 'The Terminal'

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1592 words


SHEREMETYEVO - A burlesque of Steven Spielberg's The Terminal is being staged in
Terminal E of Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport. Hordes of journalists flocked to
the airport in the last several days hoping to find Edward Snowden, the NSA
whistleblower who emerged into the global spotlight after revealing information
on the U.S. surveillance program, and then disappeared.

WHEN REALITY IS FUNNIER THAN FICTION

In Steven Spielberg's famous 2004 film The Terminal, an unfortunate traveler
from a fictitious Balkan state seeks to enter U.S. territory only to find upon
arrival in New York that his homeland has ceased to exist due to a civil war,
and his visa is no longer valid. Tom Hanks' character becomes an eyesore for JFK
officials, who can't solve his problem, and as a result he gets stuck in the
airport for nine months.

In the real world, similar stories tend to play out in a different, often even
more incredible manner. Unlike the movie, the main character, former CIA
employee Edward Snowden, has no intention whatsoever to reach the U.S., where he
has been labeled a traitor. Just like in the movie, American authorities
annulled his passport. So while powerful men sort out his fate, Snowden is stuck
in Terminal E of Sheremetyevo Airport. So far, despite the frenzy, no one has
been able to spot the fugitive.

For the last several days, Terminal E has been witnessing the unfolding of an
international political thriller. It all started on June 23, when Snowden flew
into Moscow from Hong Kong, where he was hiding from U.S. authorities after
revealing secret information, which defied the boldest fantasies of conspiracy
theorists on the government's ability to control minds. According to Snowden's
leaks, U.S. and British intelligence services have access to almost all mobile
phone calls and email on the planet. In order to shed some light on these
bloodcurdling secret practices, Snowden even gave up his annual salary of
$200,000 and a home in Hawaii.

Having been branded as a traitor in the U.S., Snowden said he would seek
political asylum in Latin America or Iceland, which of course has a long track
record of supporting freedom of speech. It is for that reason that he boarded in
Hong Kong a Moscow-bound flight, initially planning to transit to a third
destination.

LOOKING FOR SNOWDEN

However, no one actually saw Snowden in Moscow. It was unclear whether he had
actually arrived, although unnamed sources confirmed that he did. The fugitive
agent is said to have checked into the V-Express capsule hotel in Terminal E,
instantly making it the place to be for any journalist worth his salt. Reporters
immediately booked all available rooms in hopes of a glimpse of the celebrity.

Hotel staff appeared to have been under strict orders not to discuss Snowden's
whereabouts. Nevertheless, when a RIA Novosti reporter checked into the hotel
under the guise of an ordinary traveler, a female hotel employee confirmed that
the U.S. fugitive had indeed appeared at the hotel on June 23, the day he flew
into Moscow. Since the reception desk doesn't have the means to verify whether
his American passport is valid, he could have even used it for registration. But
after a few hours at the hotel, he was reportedly gone.

This reporter even took a walk through the dark corridors of the V-Express hotel
calling Snowden's name, only to see the bewildered faces of fellow journalists.
It was a shady facility, where half of the 66 rooms had no windows, although
every single one is equipped with a shower and a TV set. Apart from the exit
door, the hotel corridors end with several locked doors which could have been
used for undetected escape.

ANOTHER MOVIE ANALOGY

Snowden's travels were complicated by the fact that by the time he reached
Sheremetyevo's transit zone, his documents were no longer valid. The U.S.
authorities decided to cancel his passport when he was just about to fly into
Moscow. In order to continue his journey, he needs to receive transit documents
from any state that is willing to do this, taking into account that any such
move will be perceived by the U.S. as an act of political defiance. A refugee
document of passage could have been a solution, with Wikileaks founder Julian
Assange claiming that Ecuador issued them to Snowden. But the Ecuadorian Foreign
Ministry did not confirm this.

Under Russian laws, a passenger connecting from one international flight to
another can stay in the transit zone for up to 24 hours. After that, he or she
has to apply for a transit visa. RIA Novosti's sources claim that Snowden could
have applied for it, since Russia's Foreign Ministry has a consular desk in the
airport. But it was unclear what document Snowden could have used for this
purpose, since his U.S. passport has been canceled.

This catch-22 takes us back to The Terminal once again. Documents carried by the
film's main character show an incomprehensible Cyrillic inscription,
'[#x415][#x429][#x42c] [#x420][#x424][#x422][#x41b][#x42b],' but when he
approaches a border officer making another attempt to enter the U.S., he holds a
Belarus-style driver's license issued to a certain Gulina Gulnar Nazirovna.

SO WHERE IS MR SNOWDEN?

Sheremetyevo's transit zone covers a huge area with 24-hour cafes and duty free
outlets overcrowded with vacationers. Finding Snowden is also complicated by the
fact that terminals E, F, and D have a single transit zone. It takes thirty
minutes to walk the whole area from one end to another, while inspecting every
single corner would take hours.

But journalists are anything but time-strapped. They spend their time wandering
in the secret passages of the transit zone, peering futilely into the faces of
other passengers.

'Never saw such a frenzy. Don't you have anything better to do besides hanging
out here day and night?' a well-dressed passenger on his way to Amsterdam said.

The search for Snowden is also complicated by the fact that apart from the
capsule hotel and numerous chairs, the transit zone has a number of restricted
premises, where Snowden could be awaiting his fate in reasonable comfort. These
include several business lounges and, more importantly, a vast territory
controled by Russia's Federal Security Service (the FSB). Each door leading to
the territory has a sign saying 'Area of additional security restrictions of
Russia's Federal Security Service. Access on case-by-case basis only.' Violators
are subject to a fine of 1,000 rubles.

After ringing the doorbell of one such door, this RIA Novosti reporter saw a
young border control officer emerge from the inside. He refused to engage in
conversation, and even suggested that journalists would be better off writing
about something else.

A local Burger King serves as a headquarters for the journalists, as if it was
tacitly assumed that if an American were to emerge for lunch he would opt for a
familiar fast food chain. In addition, restaurant customers can see the entire
terminal and its gates. Another scene from The Terminal comes to mind at this
point, since it was in Burger King that the Tom Hanks character buys his first
hamburger in his first truly American experience.

Journalists occupied several tables in the café, covering them with camcorders,
cameras, and laptops with their permanently depleted batteries. But Snowden
never showed up. 'I can't say whether he came here or not. We are serving
hundreds of customers every day, including foreigners,' a girl behind the cash
register said.

And yet, well-built young men would occasionally emerge from nearby FSB premises
to order suspiciously large quantities of hamburgers and fries to go. A
mysterious smile is all that reporters get when they ask whether these meals are
intended for the fugitive American.

By the evening of June 25, enthusiasm among reporters somewhat faded, but was
revived by President Vladimir Putin, who confirmed that Snowden is still in the
transit zone. Putin said that Snowden's arrival was 'completely unexpected.'

ON THE ROAD TO HAVANA

So why Havana? Neither Venezuela nor Ecuador - the two countries willing to
consider Snowden's asylum request - have direct flights from Moscow. Possible
transit routes lie through Europe, where Snowden is likely to be detained, or
through Havana, which is not particularly friendly towards the U.S.

Snowden registered on Cuba-bound flights twice on June 24 and 25. About three
dozen Russian and foreign journalists registered for the first flight as well,
and had to leave for the island of freedom without Snowden, passing the lengthy
hours onboard a transatlantic flight filming video reports of an empty seat 17A,
where Snowden was registered. Someone started a Twitter account of the empty
seat, with tweets mostly complaining of excessive intrusiveness by journalists.
'I feel empty,' the seat's account said, adding that 'The Man Who Wasn't There'
was being shown during the flight.

After this, media companies became reluctant to spend money on expensive tickets
and limited their efforts to a 24-hour vigil in the transit zone. Access there
is available to those who have a ticket and a boarding pass for an international
flight, which prompted journalists to come up with a clever way of getting there
without actually taking a flight. The solution is to buy a ticket for a cheap
international flight, such as to Kiev or Minsk, which costs 4,000 rubles. That's
what this RIA Novosti reporter did. He registered for the 17A seat, went through
all border control procedures and is now in the transit zone. All he has left to
do is find Snowden.

To be continued....

This text originally appeared in Russian on www.ria.ru

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              541 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                            South China Morning Post

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday

The Snowden saga

BYLINE: Staff writer

SECTION: YOUNGPOST; the five Ws; Pg. 05

LENGTH: 323 words


What?

What's happened? Edward Snowden left Hong Kong for Russia last weekend, lifting
the intense pressure off Hong Kong and transferring it to Moscow. Journalists
are staking out the transit area of Moscow's airport, hoping to catch a glimpse
of Snowden, but so far none have seen him.

Who?

Who are the players in this drama? Well, we have Snowden, the American who says
the US spies on everyone, using a program called Prism. Then we have US
President Barack Obama, who wants Snowden back in the US to face trial for
spying. The US is very angry that Hong Kong allowed Snowden to leave the city.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has to deal with the US as Snowden is "in
Moscow". Putin has refused to hand over Snowden. Ecuadorian President Rafael
Correa may or may not let Snowden into his country. Venezuelan President Nicolas
Maduro is also thinking about it.

How?

How can Russia not give him to the US? Russia has no extradition treaty with the
US. Apart from blatantly refusing to hand Snowden over, Putin is using the fact
that the American has not officially entered Russia to keep the US at bay.
Snowden exited Hong Kong, going through immigration. But he has not gone through
Russian immigration as far as we know. So technically he is not "in Russia",
even though he is in the transit area at Sheremetyevo airport.

Where?

Where can Snowden go? At the moment, it looks like he might go to Ecuador. The
Ecuadorean government already shelters Wikileaks boss Julian Assange in its
London embassy. Snowden would have to fly through Havana, Cuba, to get there. On
the other hand, he could just remain in Russia, or he could disappear
altogether.

Why?

Why is the US chasing him? He worked for top US spy agencies, the CIA and the
National Security Agency. He broke their trust by revealing their secrets to the
world.

When?

When will he go? Who knows? He was meant to leave on Monday on a flight from
Moscow to Havana, but his plane seat was empty.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Snowden not one of these sleeping passengers. Photo: Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 South China Morning Post Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              542 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                                 First Edition

'It's like shearing a pig': Putin refuses to hand over fugitive;
Whistleblower - Snowden 'in Russian airport' - United States

BYLINE: Paul McGeough, Chief Foreign Correspondent Washington

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 590 words


Just when the Snowden spy saga needs comic relief to counter Washington's
bad-tempered diplomacy, in walks Russian President Vladimir Putin with his own
way of describing what might be in the whole deal for Moscow: "It's like
shearing a pig - lots of screams, but little wool."

Clearly the Russian leader thought he could indulge in such colourful language
because, for the benefit of the international throngs following the story, he
had just answered the "where's Wally?" question. Indeed, Mr Snowden was still at
Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport; though in the transit area which, technically,
meant he was not in the country.

If only in the eyes of US officials who think otherwise, Mr Putin veered towards
the disingenuous, insisting that his security agencies had not interrogated Mr
Snowden or been through his four laptops.

And showing he was not to be cowed by the American bully boys, Mr Putin vowed
that Russian authorities would not comply with American demands that Mr Snowden
be snatched and handed over to them.

Just as security specialists presume that Chinese agents hoovered all they
needed from the laptops while Mr Snowden hunkered in Hong Kong, with or without
the former intelligence contractor's permission, a former US intelligence
official was dour in a prognostication he shared with The Washington Post.

"That stuff is gone," he said.

"I guarantee the Chinese intelligence service got their hands on that right
away. If they imaged the hard drives and then returned them to him, well, then
the Russians have that stuff now."

"That stuff" could be huge. The Guardian journalist at the centre of the Snowden
drama, has talked of Mr Snowden having thousands of documents - only a handful
of which have been reported so far.

The US National Security Agency has indicated it will take months to trawl its
classified databases to establish just what Snowden lifted.

But a former government official told the Post: "They think he copied so much
stuff - that almost everything that place does, he has." By "that place", he
means the NSA as he alluded to a sense of loathing at the agency: "Everyone's
nervous about what the next thing will be, what will be exposed."

Speaking in Finland, Mr Putin argued that Mr Snowden was being treated like any
other transit passenger before he dismissed implicit and explicit accusations
from Washington as "nonsense and rubbish".

Referring to Mr Snowden and WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is helping to
get Mr Snowden to asylum in Ecuador, Mr Putin added: "[They] consider themselves
human rights activists and say they are fighting for the spread of information."

There were signs that Washington is issuing chill pills to senior officials.
Couching his words in the terms in which indignant Chinese and Russian officials
used to reject his hotheaded comments of Monday, a more measured US Secretary of
State John Kerry told reporters in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: "We're not looking for
a confrontation. We're not ordering anybody. We are simply requesting under a
very normal procedure for the transfer of somebody.

"I would simply appeal for calm and reasonableness at a moment when we don't
need to raise the level of confrontation over something as frankly basic and
normal as this."

Mr Kerry's Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov, wasn't buying the new tone. "We
consider the attempts to accuse Russia of violations of US laws and even some
sort of conspiracy which, on top of all that, are accompanied by threats, as
absolutely ungrounded and unacceptable," Mr Lavrov told reporters in Moscow.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Deep cover: Could this sleeper at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport
be Edward Snowden? Photo: Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2013 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              543 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             June 27, 2013 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Ecuador reviews Snowden request;
Embassy asks U.S. to submit objections to asylum for fugitive

BYLINE: Anna Arutunyan and Oren Dorell, USA TODAY,

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 546 words


NSA leaker Edward Snowden remained in hiding Wednesday though a hint of his
escape plans emerged when the Ecuadorean Embassy asked the U.S. why it should
not grant him political asylum.

Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport was full of media looking for Snowden, the subject
of an extradition request by the United States on a charge of espionage.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said Snowden has been in the airport since his
arrival from Hong Kong on Sunday. He said Snowden is in a transit area of the
airport that is not technically Russian soil, so Russia cannot honor the U.S.
extradition request.

The government of Ecuador said Wednesday that it is considering granting asylum
to Snowden and has asked the United States to submit any objections in writing.

Snowden's request will be "reviewed responsibly," said Efrain Baus, the deputy
chief of mission at the Ecuadorean Embassy in Washington. "The government of
Ecuador has requested that the U.S. submit its position regarding this applicant
in writing so that it can be taken into consideration as part of our thorough
review process."

Before leaving Hong Kong, Snowden was given "a refugee document of passage" by
Ecuadorean diplomats, according to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is
coordinating assistance for Snowden from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London.
Assange himself is hiding in the embassy to avoid extradition to Sweden for
questioning on rape accusations against him.

In a statement posted to the embassy website, Baus said Ecuador receives many
asylum requests each year and the legal basis for each "must be rigorously
established" in accordance with the Ecuadorean constitution, the international
legal framework and human rights.

RIA Novosti, a Russian news agency, reported that Snowden had booked two tickets
for flights from Moscow to Havana on June 24 and 25 but did not board either
flight. If he has not been able to extend his transit visa -- assuming he has
one and that it is valid for three days -- it may be about to expire. It is not
clear what his legal travel status would be if his three-day transit visa
granted by Russia expired. The United States has revoked his passport.

Former ambassador to the United Nations John Bolton said Putin's claim that
Snowden did not technically cross into Russia is preposterous. Bolton, who
served under President George W. Bush, said Snowden entered Russia as soon as
his plane crossed Russian airspace.

"Russia could've pulled him off the plane when he arrived," Bolton told Fox
News.

He said the only reason Russia is allowing him to remain is so it can gain full
access to the computer records Snowden says he stole from his former contractor
job for the National Security Agency, records he says detail secret NSA
surveillance programs and their targets. Snowden claims he stole the records
because the programs are illegal.

The White House says the programs scoured phone calls and websites for patterns
that would lead to communication among terrorists. It says the programs are
legal and have disrupted terrorist plots.

"Canceling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep
Snowden permanently in Russia. Not the brightest bunch at State," WikiLeaks said
on Twitter.

Dorell reported from McLean, Va.

Contributing: Kim Hjelmgaard in London

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo KIRILL KUDRYAVTSEV, AFP/Getty Images Passengers rest in the
transit zone in Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow on Wednesday. Russian President
Vladimir Putin says the area isn't technically Russian soil, so he can't
accommodate U.S. requests to extradite Edward Snowden.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              545 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                      June 26, 2013 Wednesday 12:23 AM GMT

US tones down calls over Snowden

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 425 words


Rebuffed by Russia's president, the Obama administration has toned down demands
that fugitive National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden be expelled from a
Moscow airport in a sign that the US believes he is not worth scuttling
diplomatic relations between the former Cold War enemies.

The White House issued a measured, if pointed, statement asking again that
Russia help US authorities capture Snowden - but stopped far short of
threatening a cooling detente if he escapes.

It was a turnabout from tough talk against China a day earlier for letting
Snowden flee Hong Kong instead of sending him back to the US to face espionage
charges for revealing classified national security surveillance programs that
critics worldwide say violate privacy rights.

The outright refusals by Russia and China to co-operate on Snowden served as a
fresh wake-up call to the US that it cannot expect burgeoning superpowers to
comply with its requests despite recent attempts to overcome long-time
suspicions, and improve global partnerships.

US Secretary of State John Kerry, speaking to reporters in Saudi Arabia, called
for "calm and reasonableness" as Moscow and Washington danced around Snowden's
fate.

"We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice," Mr Kerry said. "We're not looking for a confrontation. We are not
ordering anybody."

Russian President Vladimir Putin also said he wished to avoid a diplomatic
showdown over Snowden, but he refused to back off his refusal to turn over
Snowden to the US.

"Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the sooner he chooses his final destination the
better it is for us and for him," Mr Putin said. "I hope it will not affect the
business-like character of our relations with the US and I hope that our
partners will understand that."

Snowden remained for a third day in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport,
and Putin said he was out of Moscow's reach since he had not passed through
immigration and was, technically, not on Russian territory. Snowden was believed
to be waiting to fly to an undisclosed location - most likely in South America
or Iceland - that would give him political asylum despite frustrated US demands
that he be extradited.

Experts predicted that Mr Putin, ultimately, will not stop Snowden from leaving
or take any steps to help the US catch him. But Washington may have to place
Snowden's escape against the risk of damaging relations as the US and Russia
negotiate a number of high-priority issues, including nuclear arms reductions
and a peace settlement in Syria.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2013 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              548 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden is in our airport but we will not extradite him - Putin

BYLINE: Miriam Elder in Moscow and Jonathan Kaiman in Beijing

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 693 words


The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has revealed that the surveillance
whistleblower Edward Snowden is in a Moscow airport, ending a global guessing
game over the US fugitive's whereabouts.

The admission reversed days of Russian obfuscation and came hours after Putin's
foreign minister said Russia had nothing to do with Snowden's travel plans.

Putin said Snowden remained in Sheremetyevo airport's transit area and vowed
that Moscow would not extradite the whistleblower to the US. He also insisted
yesterday that Russia's security services had no contact with Snowden, a claim
greeted with suspicion. "For us it was completely unexpected," he claimed.

The White House responded last night by saying Russia had a "clear legal basis"
to expel Snowden, which National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden
said was the status of his travel documents - the US has revoked his passport -
and the pending espionage charges against him.

"Accordingly, we are asking the Russian government to take action to expel Mr.
Snowden without delay and to build upon the strong law enforcement cooperation
we have had, particularly since the Boston Marathon bombing," she said.

Snowden fled Hong Kong on Sunday to travel via Moscow to an undisclosed third
country, according to WikiLeaks, which said it helped his travel. He has
requested political asylum from Ecuador.

Putin said Snowden remained in Sheremetyevo's transit hall, although the
high-profile whistleblower has not been spotted once by the dozens of
journalists in the airport since Sunday.

Putin said Russia's security services "did not work and are not working" with
Snowden, who fled the United States before leaking documents on secret US
surveillance programmes. The US has charged him under the Espionage Act.

He defended Russia's actions and said Snowden, possibly carrying untold numbers
of government secrets, was treated like any other passenger. Yet passengers at
Sheremetyevo usually have 24 hours to pass through the transit zone.

"He arrived as a transit passenger - he didn't need a visa," Putin said. The
statement appeared to back comments made by his foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov,
who insisted that Snowden "did not cross the Russian border" but did not comment
on whether he was at the airport.

The US has urged Moscow to hand Snowden over. John Kerry, the US secretary of
state, said: "We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a
fugitive from justice."

Putin lashed out at US accusations that the Kremlin was harbouring a fugitive.
"Any accusations against Russia are nonsense and rubbish," Putin said.

He also appeared to support Snowden, as well as the WikiLeaks founder Julian
Assange, holed up at Ecuador's embassy in London. "Assange and Snowden consider
themselves human rights activists and say they are fighting for the spread of
information," he said. "Should you hand these people over so they will be put in
prison? It's like shearing a pig - lots of screams but little wool."

After leaking documents that exposed the breadth of the US surveillance state,
Snowden has come under fire for seeking shelter in China and Russia, both
accused of clamping down on civil liberties.

Lavrov insisted Russia did not help Snowden travel: "We have no relation to
either Mr Snowden or to his relationship with American justice or to his
movements around the world. He chose his route on his own, and we found out
about it, as most here did, from mass media.

"We consider the attempts we are now seeing to blame the Russian side for
breaking US laws and being almost in on the plot totally baseless and
unacceptable, and even an attempt to threaten us," he said.

China's top state newspaper had earlier praised Snowden for "tearing off
Washington's sanctimonious mask". The front-page piece in the People's Daily,
the official newspaper of the Chinese Communist party, responded to criticism of
China from the US for allowing Snowden to flee. The Chinese government has said
it is gravely concerned by Snowden's allegations that the US has hacked into
many networks in Hong Kong and China.

Captions:

An artist's stencil of Edward Snowden in San Francisco Photo: Steve
Rhodes/Corbis

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              549 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                      June 26, 2013 Wednesday 9:53 AM GMT

Vladimir Putin confirms Edward Snowden is still in Moscow airport and blocks US
extradition demands, as Venezuela says it would consider asylum request;
Russian President says former CIA employee remains a free man, and the sooner he
chooses destination the better

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 610 words


The Russian President, Vladimir Putin, lifted the two-day shroud of mystery
surrounding the whereabouts of Edward Snowden when he confirmed the NSA
contractor turned whistleblower is still in the transit zone at Moscow's
Sheremetyevo Airport.

Mr Putin said Russia would not extradite Mr Snowden to the US as Washington
officials have repeatedly demanded, and denied claims that Russian intelligence
agencies are working with Mr Snowden, as the White House claimed on Monday.

"Mr Snowden did indeed arrive in Moscow," said Mr Putin during a news conference
in Finland. "For us it was completely unexpected. He came as a transit
passenger, and he doesn't need a visa or other documents. As a transit passenger
he can buy a ticket and fly wherever he wants."

Mr Snowden has not been sighted since he reportedly stepped off an Aeroflot
flight from Hong Kong on Sunday afternoon. He was due to travel to Havana on
Monday, but the flight that departed with many journalists on board had an empty
seat where Mr Snowden was due to have sat. He has sought asylum in Ecuador,
according to the country's Foreign Minister, but how he plans to get there is
unclear.

The Ecuadorian ambassador to Russia was seen at Sheremetyevo but it is not clear
if he met Mr Snowden, and the lack of confirmed sightings had led some to
suspect he had been spirited out of Russia by private jet, or had never arrived
in the first place.

Now, Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has reportedly come forward to say they
will consider offering the fugitive asylum, should the Venezuelan government
receive a request for it. "We have not received an official request. But in the
event we were to receive one, we would evaluate it as we understand Ecuador is
doing similarly," Maduro said.

Separately, Germany has expressed its concern about allegations of Britain's
surveillance programme. The country's justice minister warned Britain that
democracy could not flourish when states operated under "a veil of secrecy."

Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberg has written to Justice Secretary Chris
Grayling, and the Home Secretary Theresa May, demanding to know which German
citizens have been targeted, it was reported last night.

Meanwhile, the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, said on Monday that Mr Snowden
was in a "safe place".

Mr Putin's comments seem to end to the speculation for now. "Mr Snowden is a
free man, and the sooner he chooses his destination, the better it will be for
us, and for him," Mr Putin said.

He also said he would prefer not to deal with the issue of deporting people who
claimed to be human rights activists. "It's like shaving a piglet - there is
lots of shrieking but little fur."

Earlier in the day, Russia's Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov, said it was
impossible to extradite Mr Snowden as he had never formally entered Russian
territory. Mr Lavrov claimed that the Russians only found out about Mr Snowden's
supposed route from Hong Kong to Latin America via Moscow from the media, and
that Russia had nothing to do with him or the issues America has with him.

There have been a number of strongly worded calls from US officials to extradite
Mr Snowden, and there have even been suggestions that Russia's intelligence
services might be debriefing him in Moscow. Mr Lavrov said to accuse Russia of
"violation of US laws and even some sort of conspiracy" in the case of Mr
Snowden was "absolutely ungrounded and unacceptable".

The US Secretary of State, John Kerry, appeared to tone down his criticism of
Russia. "We are not looking for a confrontation," he said. "We are not ordering
anybody. We are simply requesting under a very normal procedure for the transfer
of somebody."

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              551 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                      June 26, 2013 Wednesday 8:29 AM GMT

Vladimir Putin confirms NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden remains in Moscow
airport as Russia rejects US extradition demand;
Russian President says former CIA employee remains a free man, and the sooner he
chooses destination the better

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 552 words


The Russian President, Vladimir Putin, lifted the two-day shroud of mystery
surrounding the whereabouts of Edward Snowden when he confirmed the NSA
contractor turned whistleblower is still in the transit zone at Moscow's
Sheremetyevo Airport.

Mr Putin said Russia would not extradite Mr Snowden to the US as Washington
officials have repeatedly demanded, and denied claims that Russian intelligence
agencies are working with Mr Snowden, as the White House claimed on Monday.

"Mr Snowden did indeed arrive in Moscow," said Mr Putin during a news conference
in Finland. "For us it was completely unexpected. He came as a transit
passenger, and he doesn't need a visa or other documents. As a transit passenger
he can buy a ticket and fly wherever he wants."

Mr Snowden has not been sighted since he reportedly stepped off an Aeroflot
flight from Hong Kong on Sunday afternoon. He was due to travel to Havana on
Monday, but the flight that departed with many journalists on board had an empty
seat where Mr Snowden was due to have sat. He has sought asylum in Ecuador,
according to the country's Foreign Minister, but how he plans to get there is
unclear.

The Ecuadorian ambassador to Russia was seen at Sheremetyevo but it is not clear
if he met Mr Snowden, and the lack of confirmed sightings had led some to
suspect he had been spirited out of Russia by private jet, or had never arrived
in the first place.

Separately, Germany has expressed its concern about allegations of Britain's
surveillance programme. The country's justice minister warned Britain that
democracy could not flourish when states operated under "a veil of secrecy."

Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberg has written to Justice Secretary Chris
Grayling, and the Home Secretary Theresa May, demanding to know which German
citizens have been targeted, it was reported last night.

Meanwhile, the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, said on Monday that Mr Snowden
was in a "safe place".

Mr Putin's comments seem to end to the speculation for now. "Mr Snowden is a
free man, and the sooner he chooses his destination, the better it will be for
us, and for him," Mr Putin said.

He also said he would prefer not to deal with the issue of deporting people who
claimed to be human rights activists. "It's like shaving a piglet - there is
lots of shrieking but little fur."

Earlier in the day, Russia's Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov, said it was
impossible to extradite Mr Snowden as he had never formally entered Russian
territory. Mr Lavrov claimed that the Russians only found out about Mr Snowden's
supposed route from Hong Kong to Latin America via Moscow from the media, and
that Russia had nothing to do with him or the issues America has with him.

There have been a number of strongly worded calls from US officials to extradite
Mr Snowden, and there have even been suggestions that Russia's intelligence
services might be debriefing him in Moscow. Mr Lavrov said to accuse Russia of
"violation of US laws and even some sort of conspiracy" in the case of Mr
Snowden was "absolutely ungrounded and unacceptable".

The US Secretary of State, John Kerry, appeared to tone down his criticism of
Russia. "We are not looking for a confrontation," he said. "We are not ordering
anybody. We are simply requesting under a very normal procedure for the transfer
of somebody."

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              552 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                      June 26, 2013 Wednesday 8:23 AM GMT

Flight SU150 from Moscow arrives in Cuba without Edward Snowden - but Ecuador
confirms NSA whistleblower is seeking asylum;
Julian Assange says Snowden is 'in a safe place and his spirits are high'

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 901 words


At Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport on Monday, Edward Snowden slipped through the
net of the world's media like the invisible man, with the fugitive whistleblower
a no-show for the flight he was expected to take to Havana, Cuba. Ecuador is
apparently the American's final destination, with the country's Foreign Minister
confirming that Mr Snowden has lodged an application for political asylum. How
he plans to reach the country remains a mystery.

With the 2pm departure time drawing near there was a furious scramble as
journalists were instructed not to film around the departure gate, with some
even having footage forcibly wiped from their cameras. But despite the circus
there was no sign of the former National Security Agency contractor. Eventually,
the plane's doors closed and the dozens of Russian and international journalists
already on board realised that seat 17A was empty and they were travelling to
Havana without the man they had all been chasing. Sources at the airport
thereafter gave a series of conflicting updates to Russian news agencies: Mr
Snowden had already left the country; Mr Snowden was still in the hotel; Mr
Snowden was booked on a later Aeroflot flight to Cuba.

Half a day on, when SU150 landed in Havana, there was still no sign of the
30-year-old. The flight crew were also said to have denied Mr Snowden's presence
on the aircraft.

Mr Snowden's whereabouts have created diplomatic tension alongside the intrigue,
after Washington revoked his passport after he left Hong Kong. A White House
spokesman said the US expected Russia to send him back, and registered strong
objections with China and Hong Kong for letting him go. "We are just not buying
that this was a technical decision by a Hong Kong immigration official," Jay
Carney said. "This was a deliberate choice by the government to release a
fugitive despite a valid arrest warrant, and that decision unquestionably has a
negative impact on the US-China relationship," he said.

During a trade mission to India yesterday US Secretary of State John Kerry said:
"We don't know, specifically, where [Snowden] may head... It would be deeply
troubling, obviously, if they [Russia and China] had adequate notice, and ...
they made the decision wilfully to ignore that and not live by the standards of
the law." Russian officials said that after the recent passage of the Magnitsky
Act, which bans certain Russian officials from entry to the US, Moscow was in no
mood to co-operate.

A New York Times report quoted an unnamed source saying that Mr Snowden had been
staying in a government-owned apartment in Hong Kong before he fled. He had
apparently been compelled to seek sanctuary in the safe house after journalists
found out which hotel he had been staying in. Hong Kong lawmaker Albert Ho said
that he believed Beijing was behind the decision to allow Mr Snowden to fly out,
claiming that a Chinese government intermediary called Mr Snowden and told him
to leave, guaranteeing him safe passage. As the hours passed yesterday some
began to question whether Mr Snowden was in Moscow at all. But his presence was
later confirmed by Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who gave a news
conference during a visit to Hanoi, Vietnam.

"As we all know, he arrived in Russia," he said, after reading out the
whistleblower's asylum application. He declined to say where Mr Snowden was but
confirmed that his application had not yet been ruled on. He did, however, use
the occasion to deliver a stinging critique of US foreign policy and the
surveillance techniques which Mr Snowden uncovered. "In the last few days the
word 'treason' has been mentioned," Mr Patino said. "But is it the people who
have been betrayed, or certain elites?"

In his asylum application Mr Snowden's compares himself to WikiLeaks source
Bradley Manning and maintains that he would not receive "humane treatment" prior
to any US trial, claiming that he could be sentenced to death. He has been
charged with theft of government property, unauthorised communication of
national defence information and wilful communication of classified
communications intelligence in relation to his leaks of NSA material, each of
which carries a potential 10-year sentence.

Ecuador has already given asylum to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is in
the country's London Embassy. Mr Assange, whose anti-secrecy group has helped Mr
Snowden with his transit plans and legal assistance, said last night that Mr
Snowden was in "good health" in a safe place, but again declined to say where.

Mr Assange staged a conference call, in which he updated the world on what he
knows of Snowden's situation. Sarah Harrison, who works for Wikileaks, is
thought to be travelling with the fugitive.

Assange said that the organisation had paid Snowden's travel and living expenses
since he left Hong Kong.

He said: "We are aware of where Edward Snowden is. He is in a safe place and his

 spirits are high. Due to the bellicose threats coming from the US
administration we cannot go into further detail at this time.

"In relation to Hong Kong Mr Snowden was supplied with a refugee document of
passage by the Ecuadoran government."

When asked if Snowden had been questioned by the Chinese authorities before
leaving Hong Kong, Assange said: "As far as I am aware that is false."

He added that there was no communication between Snowden and Russian officials
before he departed from Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              554 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Russia and China deny accusations on fugitive;
Edward Snowden 'is a free man,' Putin says, and a Beijing official calls
allegations about his flight from Hong Kong 'groundless.'

BYLINE: Sergei L. Loiko and Richard A. Serrano

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


With Edward Snowden tucked away in or near a bustling international airport
here, Russia and China hit back Tuesday against the United States, denying
charges that they had helped him avoid arrest under a felony warrant for
espionage as he fled Hong Kong and laid over in Moscow.

"The accusations against the Chinese government are groundless," said Hua
Chunying, the spokeswoman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry.

"Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the sooner he chooses his final destination, the
better both for him and for us," Russian President Vladimir Putin declared.

The sharp retorts from Russian and Chinese leaders further strained a fracturing
relationship with the United States over whether the 30-year-old former National
Security Agency contract worker will be arrested and extradited to face charges
that he leaked classified material that exposed extensive U.S. surveillance
programs.

The defiant response prompted Secretary of State John F. Kerry to soften his
tone from the harsh one he used Monday when he demanded that Russia immediately
turn over Snowden.

"We're not looking for a confrontation. We're not ordering anybody," Kerry said
during a diplomatic trip to Saudi Arabia. "We're simply requesting, under a very
normal procedure ... the transfer of somebody, just as we transferred to Russia
seven people in the last two years that they requested."

Hidden from sight was Snowden, said by Putin to be staying in the "transit zone"
of hotels and shops that circles the Sheremetyevo airport. It is an area that
Putin and his foreign minister said was not sovereign Russian territory but
rather used by foreign national travelers passing through the airport without
going through Russian immigration.

Snowden, who worked for the NSA in Hawaii, initially fled to Hong Kong after the
uproar over the leaks. He landed in Moscow on Sunday.

Although the U.S. revoked his passport, he now appears to be traveling with
special documents that allow him some international passage and, he apparently
hopes, eventual political asylum in Ecuador.

The next move seems to be up to Snowden. Putin noted that Russia has no criminal
extradition treaty with the United States and would not detain Snowden. Indeed,
Putin said his government had no interest in him, noting that he had broken no
Russian laws.

"Mr. Snowden has committed no crimes, thank God," Putin said during a trip to
Finland.

Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov termed "ungrounded and unacceptable" the rhetoric
Monday from Washington.

His comments were echoed by Hua in Beijing. She called it "unreasonable" for the
United States to blame China for letting Snowden travel to Moscow.

"Washington should come clean about its record," the official New China News
Agency said. "It owes ... an explanation to China and other countries it has
allegedly spied on."

Hong Kong has insisted that it was seeking more information about the criminal
charges, including concern about a discrepancy over Snowden's middle initial, J,
before agreeing to arrest him when he suddenly flew to Moscow.

In Washington, National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said the
administration had seen the comments by the Russian leaders.

"We agree with President Putin that we do not want this issue to negatively
impact our bilateral relations," she said. "While we do not have an extradition
treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a clear legal basis to expel Mr.
Snowden, based on the status of his travel documents and the pending charges
against him.

"Accordingly, we are asking the Russian government to take action to expel Mr.
Snowden without delay."

A petition on the White House website calling on President Obama to pardon
Snowden has more than 119,000 signatures, putting it on par with one calling on
the U.S. government to grant legal status to a German family seeking asylum in
the U.S. because they wish to home-school their children.

--

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

richard.serrano@latimes.com

Times staff writer Julie Makinen in Beijing contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: EDWARD SNOWDEN was said by Vladimir Putin on Tuesday to be
staying in a special "transit zone" in Moscow.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Guardian

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              555 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

LETTERS;
Seeking Snowden

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Letters Desk; Part A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1169 words


Re "Snowden hopscotches globe, staying just out of U.S. reach," June 24

Sounds like a kid's show: Where is Edward Snowden?

At this point it doesn't really matter. Snowden has sensitive, classified
information that he has probably been taking with him on a Cold War tour. His
first haven, Hong Kong, is in China, and then there is Russia, with Cuba next on
the list.

Snowden could do real damage, as the U.S. is engaged in a technology war with
its adversaries. Regardless of what the U.S. may or may not have done wrong,
Snowden has set back the U.S. security apparatus.

Selby Jessup

Los Angeles

::

Compare Snowden's globe-trotting quest for asylum to Martin Luther King Jr. in
the Birmingham jail, civil rights marchers facing dogs and fire hoses, and
Vietnam War protesters who didn't flee to Canada but stayed here and risked
going to jail for what they believed in.

Regardless of what the message or cause might be, I respect people who are
willing to stand up for their beliefs and accept the consequences of their
actions instead of trying to escape them.

By that measure, Snowden is no hero.

Steven Mehlman

Beaumont

::

I am surprised by some politicians' harsh comments about China and Russia in
response to Snowden's movement. Bad-mouthing our allies is not an effective way
to do business.

Instead, we should accept that these countries are independent and may choose
not to do what the powerful United States demands.

I am not surprised that China ignored pleas to turn over Snowden, now that it
knows it has been targeted by U.S. surveillance. Other nations, I believe, will
similarly ignore demands for extradition. These nations will become heroes to
many in the world.

I look forward to seeing American television news shows interviewing Snowden
from Ecuador. He can give us a thorough understanding of the workings of the NSA
without threatening national security.

In essence, he'll be doing what our congressional oversight committees should
have done long ago.

Jack McGrath

Port Hueneme

::

Government of the people, for the people and by the people should be transparent
to the people. Therefore, people such as Snowden, Bradley Manning, Julian
Assange and previously Daniel Ellsberg should be considered heroes rather than
traitors.

Pauli Peter

Los Angeles

--

Brief messages, then and now

Re "Tweeting by mail," Opinion, June 23

As a man of 85, I have seen the transition from postcards to Twitter, and I can
say without hesitation that both serve a valuable purpose in communicating in
simple language.

There is a fundamental aesthetic quality in Japanese haiku: that it is
internally sufficient, independent of context and bears consideration as a
complete work. Some postcards have gained these qualities through time and use.

Let us hope that concise tweets of intelligence and poetic structure may do the
same.

Anthony Lawrence

Woodland Hills

::

Monica Cure's Op-Ed article on the initial skepticism over postcards nicely laid
out concerns over privacy and the proliferation of poor writing.

In assembling a birthday album for my 88-year-old mother of her nightmare life
growing up in Berlin during World War II, I was able to include wartime
Christmas postcards provided by Hitler to the thousands of teenage boys who were
drafted out of their classrooms and shipped out to foxholes.

The cards didn't allow space for much to be written, so it was interesting to
see how the young soldiers outsmarted the censors by deliberately misspelling
words to form hidden messages to their families at home. Evidently, the censors
never caught on and thought the boys were just lousy spellers.

Craig Carr

West Hills

--

Oil and water

Re "Why so much fracking hysteria?," Opinion, June 21

We'd be fools to trust the words of an oil industry lobbying firm.

That industry has generations of experience moving its product, but the spills
never stop. Thousands of barrels of heavy crude oil were spilled in Mayflower,
Ark., in March. People may never move back to their homes. In 2010, up to 1
million gallons of heavy crude were spilled into Michigan's Kalamazoo River.
That still isn't cleaned up.

The fossil fuel industry can't keep its pipes from bursting, nor can it clean up
its messes. So forgive Californians if we doubt the industry's assurances of
safety.

Joanne Zirretta

Aliso Viejo

--

Digging into the Coliseum deal

Re "Public may get little in stadium deal," June 23

The Times' story about the public getting little in return from the deal to give
USC control over the taxpayer-owned Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum was very
one-sided.

Of course USC should run the Coliseum and put the profits back into improving
the building. The state, county and city have proved beyond any question that
they have been inept in their attempts to run the city's most famous sports
venue.

With the university across the street from the Coliseum, it is in everyone's
best interest to turn it over to USC, which promises to fix up the place. This
will improve the surrounding neighborhood, which would decline in the event that
USC chose to stop playing at that site.

Chuck Braverman

Ventura

::

This deal is a rip-off.

Three former stadium managers have been indicted on corruption charges. The
Coliseum commission, in secret meetings, negotiated the deal that gives the
Coliseum, Sports Arena, parking and signage to USC for 98 years.

USC, you'll remember, is a wealthy institution.

Los Angeles is entitled to a more equitable deal. The citizens are entitled to
have a voice in the process.

Jeff Greenberg

Beverly Hills

--

Miranda rights and wrongs

Re "The right to remain silent is still golden," Editorial, June 24

The Times writes that when the U.S. Supreme Court's Miranda decision -- which
requires arrestees to be quickly informed of the right to an attorney and the
right to remain silent -- was handed down in 1966, conservatives objected, just
as they are now after the Boston bombing suspect was read his Miranda rights.

First, I remember the debate when this issue was before the Supreme Court. The
biggest and loudest objections at that time were from law enforcement. It was
not a major cause for conservatives.

Second, conservatives don't object to Miranda warnings being read at all. Their
concern is over Mirandizing people like the alleged Boston bomber or the accused
Ft. Hood shooter -- in other words, those accused, like enemy combatants, of
committing acts of war against Americans.

John C. Vita

Huntington Beach

::

The Times missed the mark on why conservatives were against the Boston bombing
suspect being read his Miranda rights.

It wasn't about letting him incriminate himself enough to ensure a guilty
verdict but rather about obtaining information on other suspected terrorists. At
the time, it wasn't clear if the Boston Marathon bombing was a stand-alone event
or just the first in a series of terrorist attacks.

More exceptions in extreme situations could potentially save hundreds of lives.
In addition, if proved effective, these practices would reduce the need for such
large investigatory agencies as the National Security Agency.

Lucas Klein

Claremont

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: RUSSIAN journalists meet passengers from Hong Kong, hoping to
catch sight of Edward Snowden.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Igor Kharitonov EPA

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letters to the editor

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              556 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden could remain stuck in Russia - WikiLeaks

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 782 words


The whistleblowing organization WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday
that former CIA employee Edward Snowden, wanted by the United States for leaking
state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

'Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep
Snowden permanently in Russia,' WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed, but did not
specify the names of intermediary countries.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that Snowden, whose whereabouts
had been the subject of international speculation for the past two days, was in
the transit area of a Moscow airport.

Putin said that because he remained in the airport's transit area, he had not
formally entered Russian territory and was free to go wherever he pleases. Putin
added that Russia could only hand over foreign citizens to countries with which
it has extradition treaties.

'We don't have such a treaty with the United States,' Putin said at a press
conference in Finland. 'Mr. Snowden has not committed any crimes on the
territory of the Russian Federation, thank god.'

Putin said that the quicker Snowden selects a final destination, 'the better it
will be for us and for him,' adding that he hopes the kerfuffle will not
negatively impact relations with Washington, where officials have accused Russia
of impeding US attempts to bring Snowden into custody.

Meanwhile, the White House said on Tuesday that Russia has a  'clear legal
basis' to expel Snowden  from the transit zone based on the status of his travel
documents and criminal charges he faces in the United States for allegedly
leaking state secrets.

'While we do not have an extradition treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a
clear legal basis to expel Mr. Snowden, based on the status of his travel
documents and the pending charges against him,' White House National Security
Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday.

Hayden's comments, which came hours after Russian President Vladimir Putin
confirmed that Snowden was holed up in a transit area in Moscow's Sheremetyevo
Airport, suggest Washington may be banking in part on bureaucracy to force
Russia's hand in dealing with the fugitive former CIA employee's secretive
sojourn in the Russian capital.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Passengers arriving at Sheremetyevo en route to another country, as Snowden
reportedly did on Sunday aboard a flight from Hong Kong, can only stay in the
airport's transit zone for 24 hours without obtaining a transit visa, which can
be issued at the airport itself, according to Sheremetyevo's website.

Julian Assange, founder of the whistleblowing website Wikileaks, said this week
that Snowden had been given 'a refugee document of passage' by Ecuador, where he
has requested asylum.

Douglas McNabb, a Washington-based extradition lawyer, told RIA Novosti on
Tuesday that it would be up to a given airline to decide whether to allow
Snowden on a plane with the document from Ecuador in lieu of a valid passport.

Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday that US officials 'understand that Russia
must consider the issues raised by Mr. Snowden's decision to travel there' and
that they agree with Putin 'that we do not want this issue to negatively impact
our bilateral relations.'

She said, however, that based on the status of Snowden's travel documents and
the criminal charges against him, 'we are asking the Russian Government to take
action to expel Mr. Snowden without delay and to build upon the strong law
enforcement cooperation we have had, particularly since the Boston Marathon
bombing' in April.

Secretary of State John Kerry said Tuesday that the United States is 'not
looking for a confrontation' with Russia but said US officials hope 'Russia
would not see its interests in siding with a person who is accused of breaking
the law in another nation and who is a fugitive from justice according to
international standards of law.'

Speaking in Saudi Arabia, Kerry on Tuesday called for reciprocity in requesting
Russia's assistance in returning Snowden to the United States, saying that US
authorities had returned seven individuals to Russia over the past two years
'without any clamor, without any rancor, without any argument, and according to
our sense of the appropriateness of meeting their request.'

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              587 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Rights activists call for Russian asylum for Snowden

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 501 words


Prominent human rights activists in Russia are calling on the country's
authorities to offer political asylum to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

'I'm very sad that Russia is not using this situation and is not offering
Snowden the opportunity to remain on Russian territory,' Kirill Kabanov, a
member of the Presidential Human Rights Council and former FSB officer, told RIA
Novosti. 'First of all, he is in a way a carrier of information. Secondly, it
would be a demonstration that we pay attention to people like this.'

Kabanov's comments came a day after President Vladimir Putin distanced himself
from Snowden, who is apparently stuck at Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone. 'I
personally would prefer not to get involved in such cases. It's like shearing a
pig: there's a lot of squealing and very little wool. I would rather leave it to
[FBI Director Robert] Mueller and [Russian Federal Security Service Director
Alexander] Bortnikov to resolve this.'

Although Putin mentioned the FSB head, he did not indicate that Russian security
services were interested in what Snowden knew.

'Our special services never worked with Mr. Snowden and are not working with him
now,' Putin said during a press conference on Tuesday in Finland, according to
an official transcript.

Wikileaks on Wednesday denied speculation that Snowden was being questioned by
Russian security agents.

'Mr. Snowden is not being 'debriefed' by the FSB. He is well and WikiLeaks'
[Sarah] Harrison is escorting him at all times,' the whistleblowing organization
posted on its Twitter.

Other rights activists spoke out in favor of helping Snowden remain in Russia as
long as necessary. 'I think that we should do everything possible to help Edward
Snowden,' RIA Novosti quoted Veronika Krashennikova, general director of the
Institute of Foreign Policy Research and Initiative, as saying. 'He appealed to
Russia understanding that he can avoid those risks that are threatening his
life.'

Whistleblowers in Russia, meanwhile, are often the targets of persecution,
although not necessarily directly for their whistleblowing activities.
Anti-corruption blogger Alexei Navalny, who has published exposes of Russian
state companies and accused them of embezzlement, is himself facing up to 10
years in prison on embezzlement charges which his supporters say are politically
motivated.

Kabanov, who has called on the Presidential Human Rights Council to ask Putin to
allow Snowden to remain in Russia, said the former NSA agent could serve as an
example for Russia.

Snowden 'made a step in resisting total state control, which serves as an
example, including for Russia,' Kabanov said.

WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday that Snowden, who is wanted by
the United States for leaking state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

Meanwhile, Washington said on Tuesday that  Russia has a 'clear legal basis'  to
expel Snowden from the transit zone based on the status of his travel documents
and criminal charges he faces in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              588 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden could remain stuck in Russia - WikiLeaks

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 782 words


The whistleblowing organization WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday
that former NSA employee Edward Snowden, wanted by the United States for leaking
state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

'Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep
Snowden permanently in Russia,' WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed, but did not
specify the names of intermediary countries.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that Snowden, whose whereabouts
had been the subject of international speculation for the past two days, was in
the transit area of a Moscow airport.

Putin said that because he remained in the airport's transit area, he had not
formally entered Russian territory and was free to go wherever he pleases. Putin
added that Russia could only hand over foreign citizens to countries with which
it has extradition treaties.

'We don't have such a treaty with the United States,' Putin said at a press
conference in Finland. 'Mr. Snowden has not committed any crimes on the
territory of the Russian Federation, thank god.'

Putin said that the quicker Snowden selects a final destination, 'the better it
will be for us and for him,' adding that he hopes the kerfuffle will not
negatively impact relations with Washington, where officials have accused Russia
of impeding US attempts to bring Snowden into custody.

Meanwhile, the White House said on Tuesday that Russia has a  'clear legal
basis' to expel Snowden  from the transit zone based on the status of his travel
documents and criminal charges he faces in the United States for allegedly
leaking state secrets.

'While we do not have an extradition treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a
clear legal basis to expel Mr. Snowden, based on the status of his travel
documents and the pending charges against him,' White House National Security
Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday.

Hayden's comments, which came hours after Russian President Vladimir Putin
confirmed that Snowden was holed up in a transit area in Moscow's Sheremetyevo
Airport, suggest Washington may be banking in part on bureaucracy to force
Russia's hand in dealing with the fugitive former CIA employee's secretive
sojourn in the Russian capital.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Passengers arriving at Sheremetyevo en route to another country, as Snowden
reportedly did on Sunday aboard a flight from Hong Kong, can only stay in the
airport's transit zone for 24 hours without obtaining a transit visa, which can
be issued at the airport itself, according to Sheremetyevo's website.

Julian Assange, founder of the whistleblowing website Wikileaks, said this week
that Snowden had been given 'a refugee document of passage' by Ecuador, where he
has requested asylum.

Douglas McNabb, a Washington-based extradition lawyer, told RIA Novosti on
Tuesday that it would be up to a given airline to decide whether to allow
Snowden on a plane with the document from Ecuador in lieu of a valid passport.

Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday that US officials 'understand that Russia
must consider the issues raised by Mr. Snowden's decision to travel there' and
that they agree with Putin 'that we do not want this issue to negatively impact
our bilateral relations.'

She said, however, that based on the status of Snowden's travel documents and
the criminal charges against him, 'we are asking the Russian Government to take
action to expel Mr. Snowden without delay and to build upon the strong law
enforcement cooperation we have had, particularly since the Boston Marathon
bombing' in April.

Secretary of State John Kerry said Tuesday that the United States is 'not
looking for a confrontation' with Russia but said US officials hope 'Russia
would not see its interests in siding with a person who is accused of breaking
the law in another nation and who is a fugitive from justice according to
international standards of law.'

Speaking in Saudi Arabia, Kerry on Tuesday called for reciprocity in requesting
Russia's assistance in returning Snowden to the United States, saying that US
authorities had returned seven individuals to Russia over the past two years
'without any clamor, without any rancor, without any argument, and according to
our sense of the appropriateness of meeting their request.'

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              621 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Rights activists call for Russian asylum for Snowden

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 501 words


Prominent human rights activists in Russia are calling on the country's
authorities to offer political asylum to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

'I'm very sad that Russia is not using this situation and is not offering
Snowden the opportunity to remain on Russian territory,' Kirill Kabanov, a
member of the Presidential Human Rights Council and former FSB officer, told RIA
Novosti. 'First of all, he is in a way a carrier of information. Secondly, it
would be a demonstration that we pay attention to people like this.'

Kabanov's comments came a day after President Vladimir Putin distanced himself
from Snowden, who is apparently stuck at Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone. 'I
personally would prefer not to get involved in such cases. It's like shearing a
pig: there's a lot of squealing and very little wool. I would rather leave it to
[FBI Director Robert] Mueller and [Russian Federal Security Service Director
Alexander] Bortnikov to resolve this.'

Although Putin mentioned the FSB head, he did not indicate that Russian security
services were interested in what Snowden knew.

'Our special services never worked with Mr. Snowden and are not working with him
now,' Putin said during a press conference on Tuesday in Finland, according to
an official transcript.

Wikileaks on Wednesday denied speculation that Snowden was being questioned by
Russian security agents.

'Mr. Snowden is not being 'debriefed' by the FSB. He is well and WikiLeaks'
[Sarah] Harrison is escorting him at all times,' the whistleblowing organization
posted on its Twitter.

Other rights activists spoke out in favor of helping Snowden remain in Russia as
long as necessary. 'I think that we should do everything possible to help Edward
Snowden,' RIA Novosti quoted Veronika Krashennikova, general director of the
Institute of Foreign Policy Research and Initiative, as saying. 'He appealed to
Russia understanding that he can avoid those risks that are threatening his
life.'

Whistleblowers in Russia, meanwhile, are often the targets of persecution,
although not necessarily directly for their whistleblowing activities.
Anti-corruption blogger Alexei Navalny, who has published exposes of Russian
state companies and accused them of embezzlement, is himself facing up to 10
years in prison on embezzlement charges which his supporters say are politically
motivated.

Kabanov, who has called on the Presidential Human Rights Council to ask Putin to
allow Snowden to remain in Russia, said the former NSA agent could serve as an
example for Russia.

Snowden 'made a step in resisting total state control, which serves as an
example, including for Russia,' Kabanov said.

WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday that Snowden, who is wanted by
the United States for leaking state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

Meanwhile, Washington said on Tuesday that  Russia has a 'clear legal basis'  to
expel Snowden from the transit zone based on the status of his travel documents
and criminal charges he faces in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              622 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden could remain stuck in Russia - WikiLeaks

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 782 words


The whistleblowing organization WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday
that former NSA employee Edward Snowden, wanted by the United States for leaking
state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

'Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep
Snowden permanently in Russia,' WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed, but did not
specify the names of intermediary countries.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that Snowden, whose whereabouts
had been the subject of international speculation for the past two days, was in
the transit area of a Moscow airport.

Putin said that because he remained in the airport's transit area, he had not
formally entered Russian territory and was free to go wherever he pleases. Putin
added that Russia could only hand over foreign citizens to countries with which
it has extradition treaties.

'We don't have such a treaty with the United States,' Putin said at a press
conference in Finland. 'Mr. Snowden has not committed any crimes on the
territory of the Russian Federation, thank god.'

Putin said that the quicker Snowden selects a final destination, 'the better it
will be for us and for him,' adding that he hopes the kerfuffle will not
negatively impact relations with Washington, where officials have accused Russia
of impeding US attempts to bring Snowden into custody.

Meanwhile, the White House said on Tuesday that Russia has a  'clear legal
basis' to expel Snowden  from the transit zone based on the status of his travel
documents and criminal charges he faces in the United States for allegedly
leaking state secrets.

'While we do not have an extradition treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a
clear legal basis to expel Mr. Snowden, based on the status of his travel
documents and the pending charges against him,' White House National Security
Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday.

Hayden's comments, which came hours after Russian President Vladimir Putin
confirmed that Snowden was holed up in a transit area in Moscow's Sheremetyevo
Airport, suggest Washington may be banking in part on bureaucracy to force
Russia's hand in dealing with the fugitive former CIA employee's secretive
sojourn in the Russian capital.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Passengers arriving at Sheremetyevo en route to another country, as Snowden
reportedly did on Sunday aboard a flight from Hong Kong, can only stay in the
airport's transit zone for 24 hours without obtaining a transit visa, which can
be issued at the airport itself, according to Sheremetyevo's website.

Julian Assange, founder of the whistleblowing website Wikileaks, said this week
that Snowden had been given 'a refugee document of passage' by Ecuador, where he
has requested asylum.

Douglas McNabb, a Washington-based extradition lawyer, told RIA Novosti on
Tuesday that it would be up to a given airline to decide whether to allow
Snowden on a plane with the document from Ecuador in lieu of a valid passport.

Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday that US officials 'understand that Russia
must consider the issues raised by Mr. Snowden's decision to travel there' and
that they agree with Putin 'that we do not want this issue to negatively impact
our bilateral relations.'

She said, however, that based on the status of Snowden's travel documents and
the criminal charges against him, 'we are asking the Russian Government to take
action to expel Mr. Snowden without delay and to build upon the strong law
enforcement cooperation we have had, particularly since the Boston Marathon
bombing' in April.

Secretary of State John Kerry said Tuesday that the United States is 'not
looking for a confrontation' with Russia but said US officials hope 'Russia
would not see its interests in siding with a person who is accused of breaking
the law in another nation and who is a fugitive from justice according to
international standards of law.'

Speaking in Saudi Arabia, Kerry on Tuesday called for reciprocity in requesting
Russia's assistance in returning Snowden to the United States, saying that US
authorities had returned seven individuals to Russia over the past two years
'without any clamor, without any rancor, without any argument, and according to
our sense of the appropriateness of meeting their request.'

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              643 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Rights activists call for Russian asylum for Snowden

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 501 words


Prominent human rights activists in Russia are calling on the country's
authorities to offer political asylum to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

'I'm very sad that Russia is not using this situation and is not offering
Snowden the opportunity to remain on Russian territory,' Kirill Kabanov, a
member of the Presidential Human Rights Council and former FSB officer, told RIA
Novosti. 'First of all, he is in a way a carrier of information. Secondly, it
would be a demonstration that we pay attention to people like this.'

Kabanov's comments came a day after President Vladimir Putin distanced himself
from Snowden, who is apparently stuck at Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone. 'I
personally would prefer not to get involved in such cases. It's like shearing a
pig: there's a lot of squealing and very little wool. I would rather leave it to
[FBI Director Robert] Mueller and [Russian Federal Security Service Director
Alexander] Bortnikov to resolve this.'

Although Putin mentioned the FSB head, he did not indicate that Russian security
services were interested in what Snowden knew.

'Our special services never worked with Mr. Snowden and are not working with him
now,' Putin said during a press conference on Tuesday in Finland, according to
an official transcript.

Wikileaks on Wednesday denied speculation that Snowden was being questioned by
Russian security agents.

'Mr. Snowden is not being 'debriefed' by the FSB. He is well and WikiLeaks'
[Sarah] Harrison is escorting him at all times,' the whistleblowing organization
posted on its Twitter.

Other rights activists spoke out in favor of helping Snowden remain in Russia as
long as necessary. 'I think that we should do everything possible to help Edward
Snowden,' RIA Novosti quoted Veronika Krashennikova, general director of the
Institute of Foreign Policy Research and Initiative, as saying. 'He appealed to
Russia understanding that he can avoid those risks that are threatening his
life.'

Whistleblowers in Russia, meanwhile, are often the targets of persecution,
although not necessarily directly for their whistleblowing activities.
Anti-corruption blogger Alexei Navalny, who has published exposes of Russian
state companies and accused them of embezzlement, is himself facing up to 10
years in prison on embezzlement charges which his supporters say are politically
motivated.

Kabanov, who has called on the Presidential Human Rights Council to ask Putin to
allow Snowden to remain in Russia, said the former NSA agent could serve as an
example for Russia.

Snowden 'made a step in resisting total state control, which serves as an
example, including for Russia,' Kabanov said.

WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday that Snowden, who is wanted by
the United States for leaking state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

Meanwhile, Washington said on Tuesday that  Russia has a 'clear legal basis'  to
expel Snowden from the transit zone based on the status of his travel documents
and criminal charges he faces in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              648 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden could remain stuck in Russia - WikiLeaks

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 782 words


The whistleblowing organization WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday
that former NSA employee Edward Snowden, wanted by the United States for leaking
state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

'Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep
Snowden permanently in Russia,' WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed, but did not
specify the names of intermediary countries.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that Snowden, whose whereabouts
had been the subject of international speculation for the past two days, was in
the transit area of a Moscow airport.

Putin said that because he remained in the airport's transit area, he had not
formally entered Russian territory and was free to go wherever he pleases. Putin
added that Russia could only hand over foreign citizens to countries with which
it has extradition treaties.

'We don't have such a treaty with the United States,' Putin said at a press
conference in Finland. 'Mr. Snowden has not committed any crimes on the
territory of the Russian Federation, thank god.'

Putin said that the quicker Snowden selects a final destination, 'the better it
will be for us and for him,' adding that he hopes the kerfuffle will not
negatively impact relations with Washington, where officials have accused Russia
of impeding US attempts to bring Snowden into custody.

Meanwhile, the White House said on Tuesday that Russia has a  'clear legal
basis' to expel Snowden  from the transit zone based on the status of his travel
documents and criminal charges he faces in the United States for allegedly
leaking state secrets.

'While we do not have an extradition treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a
clear legal basis to expel Mr. Snowden, based on the status of his travel
documents and the pending charges against him,' White House National Security
Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday.

Hayden's comments, which came hours after Russian President Vladimir Putin
confirmed that Snowden was holed up in a transit area in Moscow's Sheremetyevo
Airport, suggest Washington may be banking in part on bureaucracy to force
Russia's hand in dealing with the fugitive former CIA employee's secretive
sojourn in the Russian capital.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Passengers arriving at Sheremetyevo en route to another country, as Snowden
reportedly did on Sunday aboard a flight from Hong Kong, can only stay in the
airport's transit zone for 24 hours without obtaining a transit visa, which can
be issued at the airport itself, according to Sheremetyevo's website.

Julian Assange, founder of the whistleblowing website Wikileaks, said this week
that Snowden had been given 'a refugee document of passage' by Ecuador, where he
has requested asylum.

Douglas McNabb, a Washington-based extradition lawyer, told RIA Novosti on
Tuesday that it would be up to a given airline to decide whether to allow
Snowden on a plane with the document from Ecuador in lieu of a valid passport.

Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday that US officials 'understand that Russia
must consider the issues raised by Mr. Snowden's decision to travel there' and
that they agree with Putin 'that we do not want this issue to negatively impact
our bilateral relations.'

She said, however, that based on the status of Snowden's travel documents and
the criminal charges against him, 'we are asking the Russian Government to take
action to expel Mr. Snowden without delay and to build upon the strong law
enforcement cooperation we have had, particularly since the Boston Marathon
bombing' in April.

Secretary of State John Kerry said Tuesday that the United States is 'not
looking for a confrontation' with Russia but said US officials hope 'Russia
would not see its interests in siding with a person who is accused of breaking
the law in another nation and who is a fugitive from justice according to
international standards of law.'

Speaking in Saudi Arabia, Kerry on Tuesday called for reciprocity in requesting
Russia's assistance in returning Snowden to the United States, saying that US
authorities had returned seven individuals to Russia over the past two years
'without any clamor, without any rancor, without any argument, and according to
our sense of the appropriateness of meeting their request.'

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              671 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Rights activists call for Russian asylum for Snowden

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 501 words


Prominent human rights activists in Russia are calling on the country's
authorities to offer political asylum to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

'I'm very sad that Russia is not using this situation and is not offering
Snowden the opportunity to remain on Russian territory,' Kirill Kabanov, a
member of the Presidential Human Rights Council and former FSB officer, told RIA
Novosti. 'First of all, he is in a way a carrier of information. Secondly, it
would be a demonstration that we pay attention to people like this.'

Kabanov's comments came a day after President Vladimir Putin distanced himself
from Snowden, who is apparently stuck at Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone. 'I
personally would prefer not to get involved in such cases. It's like shearing a
pig: there's a lot of squealing and very little wool. I would rather leave it to
[FBI Director Robert] Mueller and [Russian Federal Security Service Director
Alexander] Bortnikov to resolve this.'

Although Putin mentioned the FSB head, he did not indicate that Russian security
services were interested in what Snowden knew.

'Our special services never worked with Mr. Snowden and are not working with him
now,' Putin said during a press conference on Tuesday in Finland, according to
an official transcript.

Wikileaks on Wednesday denied speculation that Snowden was being questioned by
Russian security agents.

'Mr. Snowden is not being 'debriefed' by the FSB. He is well and WikiLeaks'
[Sarah] Harrison is escorting him at all times,' the whistleblowing organization
posted on its Twitter.

Other rights activists spoke out in favor of helping Snowden remain in Russia as
long as necessary. 'I think that we should do everything possible to help Edward
Snowden,' RIA Novosti quoted Veronika Krashennikova, general director of the
Institute of Foreign Policy Research and Initiative, as saying. 'He appealed to
Russia understanding that he can avoid those risks that are threatening his
life.'

Whistleblowers in Russia, meanwhile, are often the targets of persecution,
although not necessarily directly for their whistleblowing activities.
Anti-corruption blogger Alexei Navalny, who has published exposes of Russian
state companies and accused them of embezzlement, is himself facing up to 10
years in prison on embezzlement charges which his supporters say are politically
motivated.

Kabanov, who has called on the Presidential Human Rights Council to ask Putin to
allow Snowden to remain in Russia, said the former NSA agent could serve as an
example for Russia.

Snowden 'made a step in resisting total state control, which serves as an
example, including for Russia,' Kabanov said.

WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday that Snowden, who is wanted by
the United States for leaking state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

Meanwhile, Washington said on Tuesday that  Russia has a 'clear legal basis'  to
expel Snowden from the transit zone based on the status of his travel documents
and criminal charges he faces in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              676 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Rights activists call for Russian asylum for Snowden

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 501 words


Prominent human rights activists in Russia are calling on the country's
authorities to offer political asylum to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

'I'm very sad that Russia is not using this situation and is not offering
Snowden the opportunity to remain on Russian territory,' Kirill Kabanov, a
member of the Presidential Human Rights Council and former FSB officer, told RIA
Novosti. 'First of all, he is in a way a carrier of information. Secondly, it
would be a demonstration that we pay attention to people like this.'

Kabanov's comments came a day after President Vladimir Putin distanced himself
from Snowden, who is apparently stuck at Sheremetyevo Airport's transit zone. 'I
personally would prefer not to get involved in such cases. It's like shearing a
pig: there's a lot of squealing and very little wool. I would rather leave it to
[FBI Director Robert] Mueller and [Russian Federal Security Service Director
Alexander] Bortnikov to resolve this.'

Although Putin mentioned the FSB head, he did not indicate that Russian security
services were interested in what Snowden knew.

'Our special services never worked with Mr. Snowden and are not working with him
now,' Putin said during a press conference on Tuesday in Finland, according to
an official transcript.

Wikileaks on Wednesday denied speculation that Snowden was being questioned by
Russian security agents.

'Mr. Snowden is not being 'debriefed' by the FSB. He is well and WikiLeaks'
[Sarah] Harrison is escorting him at all times,' the whistleblowing organization
posted on its Twitter.

Other rights activists spoke out in favor of helping Snowden remain in Russia as
long as necessary. 'I think that we should do everything possible to help Edward
Snowden,' RIA Novosti quoted Veronika Krashennikova, general director of the
Institute of Foreign Policy Research and Initiative, as saying. 'He appealed to
Russia understanding that he can avoid those risks that are threatening his
life.'

Whistleblowers in Russia, meanwhile, are often the targets of persecution,
although not necessarily directly for their whistleblowing activities.
Anti-corruption blogger Alexei Navalny, who has published exposes of Russian
state companies and accused them of embezzlement, is himself facing up to 10
years in prison on embezzlement charges which his supporters say are politically
motivated.

Kabanov, who has called on the Presidential Human Rights Council to ask Putin to
allow Snowden to remain in Russia, said the former NSA agent could serve as an
example for Russia.

Snowden 'made a step in resisting total state control, which serves as an
example, including for Russia,' Kabanov said.

WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday that Snowden, who is wanted by
the United States for leaking state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

Meanwhile, Washington said on Tuesday that  Russia has a 'clear legal basis'  to
expel Snowden from the transit zone based on the status of his travel documents
and criminal charges he faces in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              677 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Snowden could remain stuck in Russia - WikiLeaks

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 782 words


The whistleblowing organization WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Wednesday
that former NSA employee Edward Snowden, wanted by the United States for leaking
state secrets, may be permanently stuck in Russia.

'Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep
Snowden permanently in Russia,' WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed, but did not
specify the names of intermediary countries.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that Snowden, whose whereabouts
had been the subject of international speculation for the past two days, was in
the transit area of a Moscow airport.

Putin said that because he remained in the airport's transit area, he had not
formally entered Russian territory and was free to go wherever he pleases. Putin
added that Russia could only hand over foreign citizens to countries with which
it has extradition treaties.

'We don't have such a treaty with the United States,' Putin said at a press
conference in Finland. 'Mr. Snowden has not committed any crimes on the
territory of the Russian Federation, thank god.'

Putin said that the quicker Snowden selects a final destination, 'the better it
will be for us and for him,' adding that he hopes the kerfuffle will not
negatively impact relations with Washington, where officials have accused Russia
of impeding US attempts to bring Snowden into custody.

Meanwhile, the White House said on Tuesday that Russia has a  'clear legal
basis' to expel Snowden  from the transit zone based on the status of his travel
documents and criminal charges he faces in the United States for allegedly
leaking state secrets.

'While we do not have an extradition treaty with Russia, there is nonetheless a
clear legal basis to expel Mr. Snowden, based on the status of his travel
documents and the pending charges against him,' White House National Security
Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday.

Hayden's comments, which came hours after Russian President Vladimir Putin
confirmed that Snowden was holed up in a transit area in Moscow's Sheremetyevo
Airport, suggest Washington may be banking in part on bureaucracy to force
Russia's hand in dealing with the fugitive former CIA employee's secretive
sojourn in the Russian capital.

The United States has issued a warrant for Snowden's arrest on charges of
leaking details of a US surveillance program and cancelled his US passport,
which Washington says should prevent him from traveling internationally.

Passengers arriving at Sheremetyevo en route to another country, as Snowden
reportedly did on Sunday aboard a flight from Hong Kong, can only stay in the
airport's transit zone for 24 hours without obtaining a transit visa, which can
be issued at the airport itself, according to Sheremetyevo's website.

Julian Assange, founder of the whistleblowing website Wikileaks, said this week
that Snowden had been given 'a refugee document of passage' by Ecuador, where he
has requested asylum.

Douglas McNabb, a Washington-based extradition lawyer, told RIA Novosti on
Tuesday that it would be up to a given airline to decide whether to allow
Snowden on a plane with the document from Ecuador in lieu of a valid passport.

Hayden told RIA Novosti on Tuesday that US officials 'understand that Russia
must consider the issues raised by Mr. Snowden's decision to travel there' and
that they agree with Putin 'that we do not want this issue to negatively impact
our bilateral relations.'

She said, however, that based on the status of Snowden's travel documents and
the criminal charges against him, 'we are asking the Russian Government to take
action to expel Mr. Snowden without delay and to build upon the strong law
enforcement cooperation we have had, particularly since the Boston Marathon
bombing' in April.

Secretary of State John Kerry said Tuesday that the United States is 'not
looking for a confrontation' with Russia but said US officials hope 'Russia
would not see its interests in siding with a person who is accused of breaking
the law in another nation and who is a fugitive from justice according to
international standards of law.'

Speaking in Saudi Arabia, Kerry on Tuesday called for reciprocity in requesting
Russia's assistance in returning Snowden to the United States, saying that US
authorities had returned seven individuals to Russia over the past two years
'without any clamor, without any rancor, without any argument, and according to
our sense of the appropriateness of meeting their request.'

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              678 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

us security leaks

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 957 words


elusive Snowden hoodwinks the world on magical mystery tour Russia denies that
the fugitive ever crossed #124its border

Agence France-Presse

Moscow

US intelligence leaker Edward Snowden had been expected to travel on with
Aeroflot on Monday to Havana, but never appeared on the flight.

But like a twist from a Hollywood spy thriller, the main protagonist never
showed up and the supporting cast, dozens of journalists packed onto the
aircraft were left chasing shadows.

After arriving from Hong Kong on Sunday, Snowden and his legal assistant Sarah
Harrison were checked in on Aeroflot SU 150 from Moscow to Havana for Monday,
Aeroflot records seen by AFP showed.

Snowden was allocated 17 A and Harrison 17 C. But as boarding was completed and
the last calls were made, the pair never showed up.

In the end, the journalists had travelled to the other side of the world to find
themselves none the wiser as to where on earth Edward Snowden was.

"I have a feeling that we are all participating in some grandiose spy
conspiracy," said Olga Denisova, a journalist with Voice of Russia radio. "The
fact that we have not seen him for two days means he is receiving some good
support."

Russia yesterday denied that Snowden had ever crossed its border and slammed US
claims of complicity in his disappearance, as the mystery deepened over the
whereabouts of the wanted ex-contractor.

The United States had earlier urged Moscow to use all means to expel Snowden,
who leaked revelations of massive surveillance programmes to global media, but
it remained unclear if he was still laying low at a Moscow airport.

Snowden reportedly arrived at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport on a flight from
Hong Kong on Sunday. But Russian officials have insisted that he never left the
airport's transit zone.

"We are in no way involved with either Mr Snowden, his relations with US
justice, nor in his movements around the world," Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
told media.

Lavrov did not confirm or deny that the former National Security Agency (NSA)
technician had arrived at Sheremetyevo on Sunday. But he insisted that Snowden
had never crossed the border to leave the airport.

"He chose his route on his own. We learned about it, as most of those present
did, from the mass media. He did not cross the Russian border," Lavrov told
reporters.

Sources quoted by Russian news agencies have said that Snowden spent at least
Sunday night in a "capsule hotel" located in the transit area of Sheremetyevo
which would not have required him to pass through passport control or have a
Russian visa.

The leftist Latin American state of Ecuador has said it was considering a
request he made for asylum.

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, himself holed up in Ecuador's embassy in
London to avoid charges of sexual assault in Sweden, said Snowden was "safe"
after leaving Hong Kong with a refugee document supplied by Ecuador.

The Interfax news agency reported on Monday that he had "likely" already left
Russia but airport sources quoted by Russian media insisted he was still in the
airport zone. There has been no verifiable sighting of Snowden in Moscow.

Lavrov's remarks came shortly before the daily flight to Havana was scheduled to
again depart Moscow but airport security sources told ITAR-TASS and RIA Novosti
that Snowden was not registered on the flight.

"As far as we know, he is still in the transit zone," an airport security source
told ITAR-TASS. "He may still not have decided where to head next," the source
added.

The White House earlier called on Moscow to look at all the options available to
expel Snowden back to the United States, with spokesman Jay Carney saying
Washington assumed that Snowden was still in Moscow.

US Secretary of State John Kerry had expressed anger over Russia's apparent
role, urging Moscow "to live by the standards of the law".

But Lavrov slammed Washington and rubbished suggestions that Moscow was
complicit #124in Snowden's disappearance.

"We think the attempts to blame Russia of breaking US laws and even complicity
are absolutely groundless and unacceptable," he said, complaining the
accusations were accompanied by "threats".

"There are no legal grounds for such behaviour by US officials," he added.

Hong Kong, a special administrative region under Chinese rule that has
maintained its own British-derived legal system, said it had informed Washington
of Snowden's exit after determining that the US government request to arrest him
did not fully comply with Hong Kong legal requirements.

But Carney lashed out at Beijing over its purported role in the affair, saying
China's behaviour had undermined efforts to build trust with new President Xi
Jinping.

"We think that they have dealt that effort a serious setback. If we cannot count
on them to honour their legal extradition obligations, then there is a problem.

"And that is a point we are making to them very directly," said Carney.

China's foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying issued a robust defence,
saying China "cannot accept" the US charges.

Meanwhile, Snowden told the South China Morning Post in a story published
yesterday that he joined contractor Booz Allen Hamilton, from which he stole
secrets on NSA surveillance programmes, especially to gain access to sensitive
information and spill it to the press.

"My position with Booz Allen Hamilton granted me access to lists of machines all
over the world the NSA hacked," he told the Post in an interview conducted on
June 12. "That is why I accepted that position about three months ago."

Snowden abandoned his high-paying intelligence contractor job in Hawaii and went
to Hong Kong on May 20 to begin issuing a series of leaks on the NSA gathering
of phone call logs and Internet data, triggering concern from governments around
the world.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              679 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday

Putin: "Nyet" to US request to turn over Snowden

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 1138 words


Yes, he"s at a Moscow airport, and no, you can"t have him.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has given the first official acknowledgment of
the whereabouts of National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden and promptly
rejected US pleas to turn him over.

Snowden, who is charged with violating American espionage laws, fled Hong Kong
over the weekend, touching off a global guessing game over where he went and
frustrating US efforts to bring him to justice.

Putin said Snowden is in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport and has not
passed through Russian immigration, meaning he technically is not in Russia and
thus is free to travel wherever he wants.

After arriving Sunday on a flight from Hong Kong, Snowden registered for a
Havana-bound flight Monday en route to Venezuela and then possible asylum in
Ecuador, but he didn"t board the plane.

Speculation has been rife that Russian security services have been talking to
Snowden and might want to keep him in Russia for a more thorough debriefing, but
Putin denied that.

"Our special services never worked with Mr. Snowden and aren"t working with him
today," Putin said at a news conference during a visit to Finland.

Because Moscow has no extradition agreement with Washington, it cannot meet the
US request, he said.

"Mr. Snowden is a free man, and the sooner he chooses his final destination the
better it is for us and for him," Putin said. "I hope it will not affect the
businesslike character of our relations with the US and I hope that our partners
will understand that."

US Secretary of State John Kerry said Tuesday that the US wants Russia to show
respect for the rule of law and comply with common practices when it comes to
fugitives from justice.

Putin"s staunch refusal to consider deportation shows his readiness to further
challenge Washington at a time when US-Russian relations are already strained
over Syria and other issues, including a Russian ban on adoptions by Americans.

"Just showing America that we don"t care about our relations, we are down to
basically a Cold War pattern: The enemy of your government is our friend," said
Masha Lipman of the Carnegie Moscow Center.

"The Russian administration has not come that far, but we don"t know what it"s
up to," she said.

Despite Putin"s denial, security experts believe Russia"s special services
wouldn"t miss the chance to question a man who is believed to hold reams of
classified US documents and could shed light on how the US intelligence agencies
collect information.

Igor Korotchenko, director of the Center for Global Arms Trade and editor of
National Defence Magazine, said Snowden would be of particular interest because
little is known about digital espionage.

"The security services would be happy to enter into contact with Mr. Snowden,"
Korotchenko said.

Russia also has relished using Snowden"s revelations to turn the tables on the
US over its criticism of Russia"s rights record.

Putin compared Snowden to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who has been given
asylum in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London, saying that both men were labelled
criminals but consider themselves rights activists and champions of freedom of
information.

"Ask yourself a question: Should people like that be extradited so that they put
them in prison?" he said. "In any case, I would prefer not to deal with such
issues. It"s like shearing a piglet: a lot of squealing and little wool."

In an apparent reference to claims that Russia could have played a role in
Snowden"s exit from Hong Kong, Putin said his arrival in Moscow was a "complete
surprise" and dismissed such accusations as "ravings and sheer nonsense".

"He doesn"t need a visa or any other documents, and as a transit passenger he
has the right to buy a ticket and fly wherever he wants," Putin said.

Snowden, 30, is a former CIA employee who later was hired as a contractor for
the NSA. In that job, he gained access to documents that he gave to newspapers
the Guardian and The Washington Post to expose what he contends are privacy
violations by an authoritarian government.

Snowden also told the South China Morning Post newspaper in Hong Kong that "the
NSA does all kinds of things like hack Chinese cellphone companies to steal all
of your SMS data". He is believed to have more than 200 additional sensitive
documents in laptops he is carrying.

Russian news media had reported that Snowden remained in a transit zone at the
airport, which is separate from regular departure areas. He has not been seen by
any of the journalists who have been roaming Sheremetyevo in search of him,
furthering speculation that he had been secreted away.

The Interfax news agency, citing an unidentified airport official, said Snowden
could be staying in a room in the transit zone normally reserved for flight
crews and other personnel.

Legally, an arriving air passenger only crosses the border after clearing
Russian immigration checks.

Earlier Tuesday, Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov rejected the US push to turn
over Snowden, but he wouldn"t specify his whereabouts, saying only that he
hadn"t crossed the Russian border.

Kerry called for "calm and reasonableness".

"We would hope that Russia would not side with someone who is a fugitive from
justice," Kerry said at a news conference in Saudi Arabia.

The US has revoked Snowden"s passport.

A representative of WikiLeaks has been traveling with Snowden, and the
secret-spilling organisation is believed to be assisting him in arranging
asylum. Assange, the group"s founder, said Monday that Snowden was only passing
through Russia and had applied for asylum in Ecuador, Iceland and possibly other
countries.

A high-ranking Ecuadorean official told The Associated Press that Russia and
Ecuador were discussing where Snowden could go, saying the process could take
days. He also said Ecuador"s ambassador to Moscow had not seen or spoken to
Snowden. The official spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not
authorized to discuss the case publicly.

The Kremlin has previously said Russia would be ready to consider Snowden"s
request for asylum.

Some observers said Snowden"s revelations have provided the Kremlin with
propaganda arguments to counter the US criticism of Russia"s crackdown on
opposition and civil activists under Putin.

"They would use Snowden to demonstrate that the US government doesn"t sympathise
with the ideals of freedom of information, conceals key information from the
public and stands ready to open criminal proceedings against those who oppose
it," Konstantin Remchukov, the editor of independent daily Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
said on Ekho Moskvy radio.

Putin has accused the US State Department of instigating protests in Moscow
against his re-election for a third term in March and has taken an anti-American
posture that plays well with his core support base of industrial workers and
state employees.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              680 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                      Northern Territory News (Australia)

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday
                                  1 - Edition

Snowden goes missing

BYLINE: By FERNANDO GONZALEZ

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 315 words


HAVANA: Confusion over the whereabouts of US National Security Agency leaker
Edward Snowden grows after a jetliner flew from Moscow to Cuba with an empty
seat booked in his name.

Aeroflot said earlier that Snowden had registered for the flight using his US
passport, which the United States recently annulled.

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange insisted he couldn't go into details about
where Mr Snowden was, but said he was safe.

Mr Snowden has applied for asylum in Ecuador, Iceland and possibly other
countries, Mr Assange said.

An Aeroflot representative, who wouldn't give her name, said Mr Snowden didn't
board Flight SU150 to Havana, which was filled with journalists trying to track
him.

Two AP journalists on the flight confirmed after it arrived in Havana that Mr
Snowden wasn't on board.

Mr Snowden had not been seen since he arrived in Moscow on Sunday from Hong
Kong, where he was in hiding for several weeks.

After spending a night in Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, he had been expected to
fly to Cuba en route to possible asylum in Ecuador.

Experts said it was likely the Russians were questioning Mr Snowden on what he
knew about US electronic espionage against Moscow.

``If Russian special services hadn't shown interest in Snowden, they would have
been utterly unprofessional,'' Igor Korotchenko, a former colonel in Russia's
top military command turned security analyst, said on state TV.

Interfax quoted an unidentified ``well-informed source'' in Moscow as saying
Russia received a US request to extradite Mr Snowden and responded by saying it
would consider that.

But the same source said Russia could not detain and extradite Mr Snowden since
he hadn't technically crossed the Russian border.

The Kremlin previously said Russia would be ready to consider Mr Snowden's
request for asylum.

Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino said his government had received an
asylum request.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NTN


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              681 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            June 26, 2013 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Russia refuses to extradite Snowden to U.S.;
Putin says fugitive is at airport -- but not technically in country

BYLINE: Anna Arutunyan,, Kim Hjelmgaard, and Zach Coleman

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 519 words


The United States appeared no closer Tuesday to getting back fugitive Edward
Snowden, the former government contractor who remains in Russia while trying to
win third-country political asylum and protection from a U.S. extradition
request on espionage charges.

Snowden, charged for leaking classified National Security Agency (NSA)
information, remains in the transit area of Moscow's Sheremetyevo International
Airport after fleeing Hong Kong on Sunday. Russian President Vladimir Putin said
Snowden would not be handed over to the U.S. because the countries have no
formal extradition treaty. Because Snowden is in a transit zone, he's not
technically in Russia, Putin said. While working for government security
contractor Booz Allen Hamilton, Snowden, 30, exposed the NSA's massive,
long-running Internet and telephone surveillance programs.

Russia and China -- the latter of which was also unsympathetic to U.S. efforts
to return Snowden after he fled from Hawaii to Hong Kong -- have drawn sharp
criticism from the Obama administration, further straining international
relations.

China previously said it was concerned over Snowden's allegations that the U.S.
had hacked into many of the country's Internet networks.

National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said despite the lack of an
extradition treaty, there is "clear legal basis to expel Mr. Snowden, based on
the status of his travel documents and the pending charges against him."

Putin, while visiting Finland on Tuesday, said he would rather not intervene in
the case and noted that trying to navigate a diplomatic resolution was
problematic. "I'd prefer not to deal with this issue at all. It's like shearing
a pig -- too much squeaking, too little wool," Putin said.

The Russian president said Snowden was free to leave Russia. "The sooner he
chooses his final destination, the better it will be for us and him," Putin
said.

Separately, a Chinese state newspaper praised Snowden for his decision to make
public government surveillance programs, further straining already tense
U.S.-China relations. In a commentary, the People's Daily, the Communist Party's
official newspaper, lauded Snowden for "tearing off Washington's sanctimonious
mask."

"In a sense, the U.S. has gone from a model of human rights to an eavesdropper
on personal privacy, the manipulator of the centralized power over the
international Internet, and the mad invader of other countries' networks," the
commentary said.

WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy organization that is financing Snowden's
international travel and search for asylum, maintained Tuesday that Snowden had
not been debriefed by either Chinese or Russian intelligence authorities.

"That is still the case, as far as I know," WikiLeaks spokesman Kristinn
Hrafnsson said, adding that Russian officials have "made no request" to
interview Snowden about his knowledge of U.S. spy programs.

Hrafnsson declined to discuss Snowden's next move, though he said he was "fairly
optimistic" that Ecuador would grant Snowden's asylum request.

Hjelmgaard reported from London;

Coleman from Hong Kong.

Contributing: The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              682 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                               1 - State Edition

US tries to halt fugitive Snowden's asylum trip

SECTION: FOREIGN; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 623  words


MOSCOW: Washington is scrambling to stop fugitive intelligence leaker Edward
Snowden as he is expected to head for asylum in Ecuador after arriving in
Moscow.

His globe-trotting escape has compounded the crisis for Washington unleashed by
his leaks about its global spying and hacking operations, and threatens to
strain US relations with both Russia and China.

Mr Snowden - the target of a US arrest warrant issued on Friday after the IT
contractor leaked details of US cyber-espionage programs to the media - arrived
in Moscow yesterday on a direct flight from Hong Kong and was expected to head
to Ecuador via Cuba.

The US government called Hong Kong's decision to allow the former National
Security Agency (NSA) contractor to travel ``troubling,'' as the State
Department had revoked his passport and ordered other countries to prevent him
from travelling.

Mr Snowden, 30, landed at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport on a scheduled Aeroflot
flight. He did not emerge into the main terminal area, where crowds of
journalists quizzed his jet-lagged and bewildered fellow passengers about
whether they had seen the Mr Snowden on the flight.

An airport source told Interfax news agency that ``transit passenger'' Mr
Snowden had remained within the airport.

``He would not be able to leave the airport even in a diplomatic car - he has
neither a standard nor a diplomatic visa,'' the official said.

The Ecuadorian ambassador to Russia was reportedly at the airport to meet Mr
Snowden.

Airport officials said Mr Snowden was spending the night in the Vozdushny
Express ``capsule hotel'' inside the departures area ahead of his next flight.

Russian media reports cited sources within Aeroflot as saying Mr Snowden would
fly to Cuba.

Russian officials said Snowden could still potentially make it to Ecuador
without a valid US passport.

``If he has asked for asylum in Ecuador then they could give him a refugee
document or even Ecuadorian citizenship, allowing him to continue his journey,''
a security source told Interfax.

Ecuador's foreign minister Ricardo Patino says protection for Mr Snowden is an
issue of ``freedom of expression''.

``It (the request) has to do with freedom of expression and the security of
citizens around the world,'' he said.

Mr Snowden's latest interview, published on Sunday, contained new revelations
about US cyber-espionage against Chinese targets, drawing a stinging response
from China's official news agency Xinhua, which branded Washington a spy
``villain''.

US President Barack Obama's administration, which on Friday unveiled charges
including theft and espionage against Snowden, has insisted on the legality of
the spy programs and said they had helped foil some 50 terror plots.

ON THE RUN

JUNE 5: Britain's Guardian newspaper publishes a secret court order that shows
the NSA collecting millions of US telephone records.

JUNE 6: The Washington Post reports on the classified anti-terrorism program
that involves the NSA and the FBI tapping into the servers of American internet
companies.

JUNE 9: The Guardian and the Post identify Edward Snowden as source of the
leaks.

JUNE 10: US Department of Justice officials learn Mr Snowden is in Hong Kong and
start communicating with counterparts there.

JUNE 14: US authorities charge Mr Snowden with theft of government property,
unauthorised commun-ication of national defence information and wilful
communication of classified communications intelligence to an unauthorised
person. A warrant is issued for his arrest.

JUNE 15: US asks Hong Kong, under their extradition agreement, to provisionally
arrest Mr Snowden so that he can be sent back to the US.

JUNE 23: Hong Kong authorities notify the US they found the extradition request
insufficient and had allowed Mr Snowden to leave.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              683 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Snowden fleeing to Ecuador WASHINGTON DEMANDS MOSCOW STOP WHISTLEBLOWER

BYLINE: SCOTT MURDOCH, CHINA CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 717  words


FUGITIVE American whistleblower Edward Snowden was seeking asylum in Ecuador
last night amid mounting pressure from Washington and claims Beijing entered the
political fray to allow him to escape Hong Kong.

Mr Snowden, 30, was holed up in a hotel inside in a Moscow airport while
awaiting a flight to Cuba's capital, Havana.

The White House pressured the Russian government in the hours before the flight
was due to leave, saying it expected co-operation in returning Mr Snowden to the
US to face espionage charges.

The former National Security Agency contractor became one of America's most
wanted people after he fled Hawaii on May 20 to leak thousands of documents
outlining how the US monitored phone calls and internet data.

National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said the US hoped Moscow
would not allow Mr Snowden to leave, ``given our intensified co-operation after
the Boston Marathon bombings and our history of working with Russia on law
enforcement matters''.

She cited America's record of ``returning numerous high-level criminals back to
Russia at the request of the Russian government''.

``We expect the Russian government to look at all options available to expel Mr
Snowden back to the US to face justice for the crimes with which he is
charged,'' Ms Hayden added.

She expressed disappointment with Hong Kong for allowing Mr Snowden to leave on
Sunday ``despite the legally valid US request to arrest him for purposes of his
extradition under the US-Hong Kong Surrender Agreement''. ``We have registered
our strong objections to the authorities in Hong Kong, as well as to the Chinese
government, through diplomatic channels and noted that such behaviour is
detrimental to US-Hong Kong and US-China bilateral relations,'' she said.

Mr Snowden had been in hiding in Hong Kong until he left on a commercial flight
to Russia.

It was believed Mr Snowden's journey to Ecuador, via Cuba, and his escape was
organised by WikiLeaks, the whistleblowing website founded by Julian Assange,
who is also a fugitive in Ecuador's embassy in London.

Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Eduardo Patino said the Latin American state would
consider Mr Snowden's asylum request.

``We are analysing it with a lot of responsibility,'' he said. ``It has to do
with freedom of expression and the security of citizens around the world.''

It is understood that Ecuador's ambassador to Moscow was at the airport to meet
Mr Snowden, who skirted the nation's strict immigration laws by not leaving the
confines of the airport.

His escape from Hong Kong also angered US legislators who had started
extradition procedures to have him returned to face the freshly laid charges.

A Justice Department spokesman said Hong Kong officials had not raised the
prospect of allowing Mr Snowden to leave voluntarily during constant
negotiations with the US since he arrived in the territory late last month.

``In light of this, we find their decision particularly troubling,'' he said.
``The US is disappointed and disagrees with the determination by Hong Kong
authorities to not honour the US request for the fugitive Edward Snowden.''

It was revealed yesterday that China's government could have played a role in
providing permission for Mr Snowden to flee Hong Kong.

Beijing had previously been hesitant to enter the Snowden incident in fear of
further damaging its fragile relationship with the US and interfering with Hong
Kong's autonomy.

The New York Times claimed that while Hong Kong said it was in charge of its
judicial process, Beijing remained in ultimate control of foreign policy issues.

``Behind the door there was definitely some co-ordination between Hong Kong and
Beijing,'' Jin Canrong, professor of international relations at Renmin
University, told the newspaper.

Mr Snowden's most recent allegations that the US had hacked the prestigious
Tsinghua University in Beijing were seized on in China's state-owned media
yesterday.

The Global Times, a nationalist tabloid, said the allegations were embarrassing
for the US, which has repeatedly accused China of cyber hacking.

``Washington must be grinding its teeth because Snowden's revelations have
almost overturned the image of the US as a defender a free internet,'' it said.

``The whole world benefits from Snowden's exposure.''

______________________________

>> EDITORIAL P11

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              684 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                       June 25, 2013 Tuesday 1:25 PM GMT

Fugitive Edward Snowden sets superpowers on collision course as Moscow and
Beijing lock horns with White House

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 910 words


Russia and China are flexing their muscles with Washington as diplomatic
relations between the world's greatest economic and political forces plunges to
new depths as the US continues it hunt for elusive whistleblower Edward Snowden.

In Moscow, foreign minister Sergey Lavrov has slammed US demands to extradite
NSA whistleblowerEdward Snowden, who is believed to have stopped in Moscow while
trying to evade American justice.

Lavrov said Snowden has not crossed the Russian border and insisted that Russia
has nothing to do with him, his relations with US justice, or his travel plans.

He angrily criticised American demands for Snowden's extradition and warnings of
negative consequences if Moscow fails to comply.

Mr Lavrov said that accusing Russia of "violation of US laws and even some sort
of conspiracy" with regard to Snowden is "absolutely ungrounded and
unacceptable".

He would not specify the location of Snowden, who booked a Havana-bound flight
from Moscow yesterday but did not show up on the plane.

The White House demanded that he be denied asylum, blasted China for letting him
go and urged Russia to "do the right thing" and send him back to America to face
espionage charges.

Mr Snowden was believed to be in Russia, where he fled on Sunday after weeks of
hiding out in Hong Kong following his disclosure of the broad scope of two
highly classified counter-terror surveillance programmes to two newspapers.

The programmes collect vast amounts of Americans' phone records and worldwide
online data in the name of national security.

Mr Snowden had flown from Hong Kong to Russia, and was expected to fly early
yesterday to Havana, from where he would continue on to Ecuador, where he has
applied for asylum. But he did not get on that plane and his exact whereabouts
were unclear.

The founder of WikiLeaks, the secret-spilling organisation that has embraced Mr
Snowden, said the American was only passing through Russia on his way to an
unnamed destination to avoid the reach of US authorities.

Julian Assange said Mr Snowden had applied for asylum in Ecuador, Iceland and
possibly other countries.

Despite its diplomatic tough talk, the US faces considerable difficulty in
securing co-operation on Mr Snowden from nations with whom it has chilly
relations.

The White House said Hong Kong's refusal to detain Mr Snowden had
"unquestionably" hurt relations between the US and China.

While Hong Kong has a high degree of autonomy from the rest of China, experts
said Beijing probably orchestrated Mr Snowden's exit in an effort to remove an
irritant in Sino-US relations.

President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping met earlier this month
in California to smooth over rough patches in the countries' relationship,
including allegations of hacking into each other's computer systems.

Secretary of State John Kerry urged Moscow to "do the right thing" amid
high-level pressure on Russia to turn over Mr Snowden.

"We're following all the appropriate legal channels and working with various
other countries to make sure that the rule of law is observed," Mr Obama told
reporters when asked if he was confident that Russia would expel Mr Snowden.

His spokesman, Jay Carney, said the US was expecting the Russians "to look at
the options available to them to expel Mr Snowden back to the US to face justice
for the crimes with which he is charged".

He added: "The Chinese have emphasised the importance of building mutual trust.
And we think that they have dealt that effort a serious setback.

"This was a deliberate choice by the government to release a fugitive despite a
valid arrest warrant, and that decision unquestionably has a negative impact on
the US-China relationship."

Mr Snowden has acknowledged revealing details of top-secret surveillance
programmes that sweep up millions of phone and Internet records daily.

He is a former CIA employee who later was hired as a contractor through Booz
Allen to be a computer systems analyst. In that job, he gained access to
documents - many of which he has given to The Guardian and The Washington Post
to expose what he contends are privacy violations by an authoritarian
government.

Mr Assange and lawyers for WikiLeaks attacked the US for "bullying" foreign
nations into refusing asylum to Mr Snowden. WikiLeaks counsel Michael Ratner
said Mr Snowden is protected as a whistle-blower by the same international
treaties that the US has in the past used to criticise policies in China and
African nations.

Ecuador's president and foreign minister declared that national sovereignty and
universal principles of human rights - not US prodding - would govern any
decision they might make on granting asylum to Mr Snowden.

Ecuador has rejected some previous US efforts at co-operation and has been
helping Mr Assange avoid prosecution by allowing him to stay at its embassy in
London.

Formally, Mr Snowden's application for Ecuadoran asylum remains only under
consideration. But Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino made little effort to
disguise his government's position.

He told reporters in Hanoi that the choice Ecuador faced in hosting Mr Snowden
was "betraying the citizens of the world or betraying certain powerful elites in
a specific country".

Mr Patino said that he did not know Nr Snowden's exact whereabouts.

American experts said the US will have limited, if any, influence to persuade
governments to turn over Mr Snowden if he heads to Cuba or nations in South
America that are seen as hostile to Washington.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2013 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              687 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                          SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION

CUT & RUN Snowden: Lower-pay job part of my plot to nab info

BYLINE: BY ADAM EDELMAN and STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 556 words


EDWARD SNOWDEN - still apparently in hiding in Moscow - planned his stunning
document dump for months.

The ex-defense contractor took a pay cut at Booz Allen Hamilton in Hawaii in
order to gain access to a trove of top-secret National Security Agency
documents, the South China Morning Post reported Monday.

"My position with Booz Allen Hamilton granted me access to lists of machines all
over the world the NSA hacked," he told the Hong Kong newspaper when he spoke to
them on June 12. "That is why I accepted that position about three months ago."

In an online Q&A last week, Snowden clarified that he at one time had been paid
as much as $200,000 a year for his various duties as a systems administrator for
the National Security Agency and a technician for the CIA.

At Booz Allen Hamilton, however, he was paid $120,000 - a salary he accepted
because of his plan to pull back the veil of secrecy surrounding the U.S.
government's surveillance capabilities.

Meanwhile an increasingly exasperated Obama administration pressured Russia to
hand Snowden over - and blasted China for letting him out of Hong Kong.

The 29-year-old high school dropout managed to avoid arrest Sunday and travel
from Hong Kong to Moscow, but did not board a plane bound for Cuba Monday as was
expected.

"It is our assumption that he is in Russia," White House spokesman Jay Carney
said.

Carney added that the Obama administration had been in contact with Russian
officials regarding Snowden.

He also took strong exception to Hong Kong's decision to let Snowden travel to
Moscow.

"This was a deliberate choice to release a fugitive despite a valid arrest
warrant," Carney said. "That decision unquestionably has a negative impact" on
the U.S.-China relationship.

U.S. agents are even investigating the possibility that Snowden's leaks are a
Chinese intelligence operation, four American officials told Bloomberg
News.President Obama said the U.S. was "following all the appropriate legal
channels and working with various other countries to make sure that the rule of
law is observed" in pursuit of the leaker. Obama didn't clarify which countries
he was referring to.

But the diplomatic pressure had produced no results.

Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, was even more vague about how his
anti-secrecy organization was assisting Snowden in his quest for asylum in
Ecuador or another country.

"He is in a safe place. His spirits are high," said Assange. "Due to the
bellicose threats coming from the U.S. administration, we can't go into further
details."

Snowden traveled from Hong Kong with Sarah Harrison, a British activist and
member of the WikiLeaks legal team. The group had also covered Snowden's travel
expenses since his departure.

"He's used WikiLeaks' expertise to secure his safety," Assange said from the
Ecuadoran Embassy in London where he has been holed up for a year, fighting
extradition to Sweden on charges of sexual assault. Assange added that his own
lack of transparency was due to the U.S. government's hunt for Snowden, who
released documents regarding the government's gathering of data on Americans'
phone calls, its access to servers of nine major Internet companies and hacking
of computers in Hong Kong and China.

Snowden reportedly downloaded as many as 200 top-secret documents from NSA
computers onto a thumb drive before leaving Hawaii.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Edward Snowden was expected to be on this seat on a flight from Moscow
to Havana, but it proved to be empty. Photo by Reuters The Aeroflot Airbus A330
took off Monday without Snowden, whose final destination is still uncertain.
Photo by AP Ecuador Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino (far r.) said his country is
"analyzing" asylum request from Snowden (near r.).

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


                              688 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

They seek him there: media board flight to Havana but Snowden remains elusive:
Whistleblower fails to board Cuba-bound plane We will consider request for
asylum, says Moscow

BYLINE: Miriam Elder in Moscow

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 923 words


As the Aeroflot jet bound for Havana rolled away from the gate at Sheremetyevo
airport, the question became: was he ever even really here?

For more than 24 hours, the sprawling international airport on Moscow's northern
outskirts was the site of an intricate game of cat and mouse. The target: Edward
Snowden, sought by an enraged US, which has charged him with leaking classified
documents on US surveillance programmes and warned countries suspected of
abetting his escape.

The action culminated at 2pm yesterday afternoon outside gate 28, where Snowden
was checked in for a flight to Havana, another stopover en route to Venezuela or
Ecuador, where he had sought political asylum.

Dozens of journalists assembled at the window, hoping to spot the man who had
eluded them for endless hours inside Sheremetyevo's winding halls. Soon, they
imagined, they would have Snowden cornered, ready to spill his innermost
thoughts as the plane hurtled towards Havana for a full 12 hours.

The news swept through the hall: Russian news agencies had reported that Snowden
and his travelling companion, Sarah Harrison of WikiLeaks, had checked into
seats 17A and 17C. Those seated nearby were giddy.

As the plane started to board, more than a dozen Aeroflot agents converged on
the gate and ushered reporters away from the windows. They threatened to
confiscate cameras and telephones, and attempted to block the view. Some
journalists said they were ready to hide their telephones in their pants.
Anything for a snap of Snowden. One by one, the journalists got on board - all
the world's media, and Russia's, too. The line dwindled to a crawl and the
Aeroflot agents began to whisper: "He's not on board."

The gate closed. A detachable staircase pulled away from the aircraft. The
Airbus began to roll backward. "He's not on board," said Nikolai Sokolov, an
Aeroflot gate employee, his eyes wide. "I was waiting for him myself."

Around two dozen journalists settled in for the 12-hour journey to Havana - a
flight on which no alcohol is served, much to the chagrin of the reporters, many
of whom aren't used to going half a day without a stiff drink.

And, yet again, Snowden was nowhere to be found.

He was reportedly in Moscow for 21 hours but no photographs or video of him have
emerged, and no leaks from the Federal Security Service or police, who use the
website Life News to broadcast the news they want the world to see.

Moscow has made its overtures to Snowden obvious, with Vladimir Putin's
spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, repeatedly saying the Kremlin would consider an asylum
request from the American, as it would any other. But the events come amid the
worst Russian-US relations since the end of the cold war, with the Kremlin once
again making anti-Americanism a central governing pillar.

Washington could barely disguise its fury at the way Snowden was hustled out of
Hong Kong, despite the US having revoked his passport and demanded his
detention. The White House spokesman Jay Carney said the administration
disbelieved the explanation that Hong Kong immigration officials had made a
"technical" decision. He said: "The Hong Kong authorities were advised of the
status of Mr Snowden's travel documents in plenty of time to have prohibited his
travel as appropriate. We do not buy the suggestion that China could not have
taken action."

Speaking in Delhi, the US secretary of state, John Kerry expressed frustration
that China had failed to detain Snowden. "It would be deeply troubling,
obviously, if they had adequate notice, and notwithstanding that, they make the
decision willfully to ignore that and not live by the standards of the law."

Ricardo Patino, Ecuador's foreign minister, speaking in Hanoi, said his country
was considering an asylum request by Snowden but did not know where he was.
Patino read out what he said was a statement from Snowden, in which the
whistleblower compared himself to the WikiLeaks source Bradley Manning, on trial
in the US for "aiding the enemy".

Snowden apparently said: "It is unlikely that I will have a fair trial or humane
treatment before trial, and also I have the risk of life imprisonment or death."

Details also emerged about Snowden's last few days in Hong Kong. A source with
knowledge of events in Hong Kong said Snowden had appeared nervous when he left
and unsure whether he might be heading into a trap. "It happened very suddenly,
in one or two days. Before that, he was thinking of staying and fighting the
case," the source said. "He knew that he was in trouble but he didn't panic. He
understood the consequences of what he had done, making enemies of many people,
but he didn't regret it."

Snowden is believed to have landed in Moscow shortly after 5pm on Sunday.
Lacking a Russian visa, and stripped of his US passport anyway, he was unable to
leave the airport. That left the Capsule Hotel, a newly opened site in
Sheremetyevo's terminal E featuring sparse suites with room for little more than
a bed. Receptionists there examined photos of Snowden and said they had never
seen him.

As evening began to fall, Ecuador's ambassador to Moscow arrived at the airport.
He, too, was seeking Snowden; he, too, had no idea where to find him. He was
still waiting in the airport, empty of its daytime rush, at 2am yesterday. It
was unclear whether he had, at that point, achieved his goal.

Additional reporting by Spencer Ackerman in Washington and Tania Branigan in
Hong Kong

Captions:

Desperately seeking Snowden, journalists wait at Sheremetyevo airport, where he
was last seen. Photograph: Barcroft Media

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              690 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       June 25, 2013 Tuesday 7:46 PM GMT

NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden still in Moscow airport as Russia rejects US
extradition demand;
Russian President says former CIA employee remains a free man, and the sooner he
chooses destination the better

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 609 words


President Vladimir Putin ended the two-day shroud of mystery surrounding the
whereabouts of Edward Snowden this evening when he confirmed that the
whistleblower is still in the transit zone at Moscow's Sheremetevo Airport.

Mr Putin said Russia would not extradite Mr Snowden to the US as top Washington
officials have repeatedly demanded, and denied claims that Russian intelligence
agencies are working with the former NSA contractor.

"Mr Snowden did indeed arrive in Moscow," said Mr Putin during a news conference
in Finland. "For us it was completely unexpected. He came as a transit
passenger, and he doesn't need a visa or other documents. As a transit passenger
he can buy a ticket and fly wherever he wants."

Mr Snowden has not been sighted since he reportedly stepped off an Aeroflot
flight to Moscow from Hong Kong on Sunday afternoon. He was due to travel to
Havana on Monday, but the Aeroflot flight departed with dozens of journalists on
board, but with the seat that had been booked in Mr Snowden's name remaining
empty.

He has sought asylum in Ecuador, according to Ecuador's Foreign Minister, but
how he plans to get there is unclear. The Ecuadorian Ambassador to Russia was
seen at Sheremetevo on Sunday evening but it is not clear if he met Mr Snowden,
and the lack of confirmed sightings had led some people to suspect he had been
spirited out of Russia by private jet, or had never even arrived on the flight
from Hong Kong. Wikileaks founder Julian Assange said on Monday that Mr Snowden
was in a "safe place" and accompanied by Wikileaks staffer Sarah Harrison, but
did not go into further detail. Despite the lack of sightings at Sheremetevo, Mr
Putin's words seem to put an end to the speculation, for now.

"Mr Snowden is a free man, and the sooner he chooses his destination point, the
better it will be for us, and for him," said the Russian President.. Using
characteristic quirky metaphor, Mr Putin also said he would prefer not to deal
with the issue of deporting people who claimed to be human rights activists.
"It's like shaving a piglet - there is lots of shrieking but little fur," he
said.

Earlier in the day, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that it was impossible
for Russia to extradite Mr Snowden as he had never formally entered Russian
territory, remaining in the transit zone. Mr Lavrov claimed that the Russians
only found out about Mr Snowden's supposed route from Hong Kong to Latin America
via Moscow from the media, and that Russia had nothing to do with him or the
issues US justice has with him. "He chose his itinerary on his own," said Mr
Lavrov at a news briefing in Moscow. "We learnt about it... from the media. He
has not crossed the Russian border."

There have been a number of strongly worded calls from US officials to extradite
Mr Snowden, and there have even been suggestions that Russia's intelligence
services might be debriefing the whistleblower in Moscow. Mr Lavrov said to
accuse Russia of  "violation of US laws and even some sort of conspiracy" in the
case of Mr Snowden is "absolutely ungrounded and unacceptable".

Secretary of State John Kerry, visiting Saudi Arabia, seemed to tone down his
critique of Russia earlier today. "We are not looking for a confrontation," he
said. "We are not ordering anybody. We are simply requesting under a very normal
procedure for the transfer of somebody." However, both Mr Putin and Mr Lavrov
categorically ruled out Mr Snowden's extradition.

The next Aeroflot flight to Havana, Cuba, the most obvious way for Mr Snowden to
reach his supposed final destination of Ecuador unless he is provided by a
private or governmental jet, leaves on Thursday afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              693 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       June 25, 2013 Tuesday 7:18 AM GMT

Flight SU150 from Moscow arrives in Cuba without Edward Snowden - but Ecuador
confirms NSA whistleblower is seeking asylum;
Julian Assange says Snowden is 'in a safe place and his spirits are high'

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 966 words


At Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport on Monday, Edward Snowden slipped through the
net of the world's media like the invisible man, with the fugitive whistleblower
a no-show for the flight he was expected to take to Havana, Cuba. Ecuador is
apparently the American's final destination, with the country's Foreign Minister
confirming that Mr Snowden has lodged an application for political asylum. How
he plans to reach the country remains a mystery.

Mr Snowden has performed an impressive disappearing act since arriving in Moscow
on a flight from Hong Kong on Sunday afternoon. After apparently spending a
night in a transit hotel in the airport, Aeroflot confirmed that he was
subsequently booked on to flight SU150, the 12-hour direct flight to Havana, and
sources even revealed his seat number - 17A, a window slot in economy class.

With the 2pm departure time drawing near there was a furious scramble as
journalists were instructed not to film around the departure gate, with some
even having footage forcibly wiped from their cameras. But despite the circus
there was no sign of the former National Security Agency contractor. Eventually,
the plane's doors closed and the dozens of Russian and international journalists
already on board realised that seat 17A was empty and they were travelling to
Havana without the man they had all been chasing. Sources at the airport
thereafter gave a series of conflicting updates to Russian news agencies: Mr
Snowden had already left the country; Mr Snowden was still in the hotel; Mr
Snowden was booked on a later Aeroflot flight to Cuba.

Half a day on, when SU150 landed in Havana, there was still no sign of the
30-year-old. The flight crew were also said to have denied Mr Snowden's presence
on the aircraft.

Mr Snowden's whereabouts have created diplomatic tension alongside the intrigue,
after Washington revoked his passport after he left Hong Kong. A White House
spokesman said the US expected Russia to send him back, and registered strong
objections with China and Hong Kong for letting him go. "We are just not buying
that this was a technical decision by a Hong Kong immigration official," Jay
Carney said. "This was a deliberate choice by the government to release a
fugitive despite a valid arrest warrant, and that decision unquestionably has a
negative impact on the US-China relationship," he said.

During a trade mission to India yesterday US Secretary of State John Kerry said:
"We don't know, specifically, where [Snowden] may head... It would be deeply
troubling, obviously, if they [Russia and China] had adequate notice, and ...
they made the decision wilfully to ignore that and not live by the standards of
the law." Russian officials said that after the recent passage of the Magnitsky
Act, which bans certain Russian officials from entry to the US, Moscow was in no
mood to co-operate.

A New York Times report quoted an unnamed source saying that Mr Snowden had been
staying in a government-owned apartment in Hong Kong before he fled. He had
apparently been compelled to seek sanctuary in the safe house after journalists
found out which hotel he had been staying in. Hong Kong lawmaker Albert Ho said
that he believed Beijing was behind the decision to allow Mr Snowden to fly out,
claiming that a Chinese government intermediary called Mr Snowden and told him
to leave, guaranteeing him safe passage. As the hours passed yesterday some
began to question whether Mr Snowden was in Moscow at all. But his presence was
later confirmed by Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who gave a news
conference during a visit to Hanoi, Vietnam.

"As we all know, he arrived in Russia," he said, after reading out the
whistleblower's asylum application. He declined to say where Mr Snowden was but
confirmed that his application had not yet been ruled on. He did, however, use
the occasion to deliver a stinging critique of US foreign policy and the
surveillance techniques which Mr Snowden uncovered. "In the last few days the
word 'treason' has been mentioned," Mr Patino said. "But is it the people who
have been betrayed, or certain elites?"

In his asylum application Mr Snowden's compares himself to WikiLeaks source
Bradley Manning and maintains that he would not receive "humane treatment" prior
to any US trial, claiming that he could be sentenced to death. He has been
charged with theft of government property, unauthorised communication of
national defence information and wilful communication of classified
communications intelligence in relation to his leaks of NSA material, each of
which carries a potential 10-year sentence.

Ecuador has already given asylum to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is in
the country's London Embassy. Mr Assange, whose anti-secrecy group has helped Mr
Snowden with his transit plans and legal assistance, said last night that Mr
Snowden was in "good health" in a safe place, but again declined to say where.

Mr Assange staged a conference call, in which he updated the world on what he
knows of Snowden's situation. Sarah Harrison, who works for Wikileaks, is
thought to be travelling with the fugitive.

Assange said that the organisation had paid Snowden's travel and living expenses
since he left Hong Kong.

He said: "We are aware of where Edward Snowden is. He is in a safe place and his

 spirits are high. Due to the bellicose threats coming from the US
administration we cannot go into further detail at this time.

"In relation to Hong Kong Mr Snowden was supplied with a refugee document of
passage by the Ecuadoran government."

When asked if Snowden had been questioned by the Chinese authorities before
leaving Hong Kong, Assange said: "As far as I am aware that is false."

He added that there was no communication between Snowden and Russian officials
before he departed from Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              697 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       June 25, 2013 Tuesday 12:21 AM GMT

NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden: Fugitive fails to show for flight from Moscow
to Cuba - but Ecuador's foreign minister confirms he wants asylum;
Julian Assange says Snowden is 'in a safe place and his spirits are high'

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: INDEPENDENT PLUS

LENGTH: 904 words


At Moscow's Sheremetevo Airport, Edward Snowden slipped through the net of the
world's media like the invisible man, with the fugitive whistleblower a no-show
for the flight he was expected to take to Havana, Cuba.

Ecuador is apparently the American's final destination, with the country's
foreign minister confirming that Mr Snowden has lodged an application for
political asylum, but how he plans to reach the Latin American country remains a
mystery.

Mr Snowden has performed an impressive disappearing act since apparently
arriving in Moscow on a flight from Hong Kong, where he spent several weeks in
hiding, yesterday afternoon. Aeroflot confirmed that he was subsequently booked
onto SU150, the 12-hour direct flight to Havana, and sources even revealed his
seat number - 17A, a window seat in economy class.

As the 2pm departure time came nearer, there was a furious scramble as
journalists were instructed not to film around the Havana gate at Sheremetevo
Airport, and some even had footage forcibly wiped from their cameras. But
despite the circus, there was no sign of the man himself. Eventually, the
plane's doors were closed, and the dozens of Russian and international
journalists already on the plane realised that seat 17A was empty and they were
apparently travelling to Havana without the man they had all been chasing.

Sources at the airport thereafter gave a smorgasbord of conflicting tidbits of
information to Russian news agencies: Snowden had already left the country;
Snowden was still in the transit hotel; Snowden was now booked onto a later
Aeroflot flight to Havana.

The US has revoked his passport and Secretary of State John Kerry yesterday
spoke sharply about Russia and China potentially letting the whistleblower leave
their territory. "We don't know, specifically, where he may head, or what his
intended destination may be," said Mr Kerry during a visit to India. "It would
be deeply troubling, obviously, if they [Russia and China] had adequate notice,
and notwithstanding that, they make the decision wilfully to ignore that and not
live by the standards of the law." Russian officials brushed off Mr Kerry's
remarks, saying that after the recent passage of the Magnitsky Act, which bans
certain Russian officials from entry to the US, Moscow is in no mood to
cooperate.

But as the hours continued to pass without a confirmed sighting of Mr Snowden,
some began to wonder if Mr Snowden had ever been in Russia at all. It was not so
much a case of "now you see him, now you don't", as a case of nobody having seen
him in the first place. The only suggestions that Mr Snowden had ever been in
Russia at all had come from his flight booking from Hong Kong, and a Wikileaks
statement, that the organisation was helping Mr Snowden on his flight to "a
democratic country" via Russia.

Hong Kong authorities had said only that Mr Snowden had left for a "third
country", while passengers quizzed on disembarking the Hong Kong flight in
Moscow said they had not noticed the American onboard. It seemed plausible that
the whole story of the Hong Kong - Moscow - Havana route may have been a
smokescreen to distract people from a different travel itinerary.

Nevertheless, there is plenty of circumstantial evidence that Mr Snowden was
indeed at Moscow's Sheremetevo Airport, at least at some point. There was the
visit to the airport yesterday evening by two Ecuadorian diplomatic cars,
including the country's ambassador, who said he planned to meet with Mr Snowden.
Then there was the strong presence of the FSB, Russia's security service, around
the hotel inside the airport where Mr Snowden was supposedly staying.

Later, Mr Snowden's presence in Russia was confirmed by Ecuador's Foreign
Minister, Ricardo Patino, who gave a news conference in Hanoi, Vietnam. "As we
all know, he arrived in Russia," he said, after reading out the whistleblower's
asylum application. "Ecuador has maintained a respectful and diplomatic contact
with government of Russia." He declined to answer a question about the exact
current whereabouts of Mr Snowden, saying he had no information. He said that
the asylum application had not yet been ruled on, but used the occasion to
deliver a stinging critique of US foreign policy and the surveillance techniques
which Mr Snowden uncovered. Ecuador has already given asylum to Wikileaks
founder Julian Assange, who is hiding out in the country's London Embassy.

"In the last few days the word treason has been mentioned," he said. "But is it
the people who have been betrayed, or certain elites?"

Mr Assange staged a conference call, in which he updated the world on what he
knows of Snowden's situation. Sarah Harrison, who works for Wikileaks, is
thought to be travelling with the fugitive.

Assange said that the organisation had paid Snowden's travel and living expenses
since he left Hong Kong.

He said: "We are aware of where Edward Snowden is. He is in a safe place and his

 spirits are high. Due to the bellicose threats coming from the US
administration we cannot go into further detail at this time.

"In relation to Hong Kong Mr Snowden was supplied with a refugee document of
passage by the Ecuadoran government."

When asked if Snowden had been questioned by the Chinese authorities before
leaving Hong Kong, Assange said: "As far as I am aware that is false."

He added that there was no communication between Snowden and Russian officials
before he departed from Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              698 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Ex-N.S.A. worker leads U.S. on a game of chase

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY, PETER BAKER and DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1070 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW

ABSTRACT

Edward J. Snowden, the former national security contractor accused of espionage,
did not leave Moscow as expected on a flight to Havana on Monday.

FULL TEXT

Edward J. Snowden, the former national security contractor accused of espionage,
did not leave Moscow as expected on a flight to Havana on Monday, raising
questions about what, if any, alternative travel plans he may have made.

It also raised the possibility that the Russian government had detained him,
either to consider the demands by the Obama administration to intercept him and
return him to the United States or perhaps to question him for Russia's own
purposes.

Mr. Snowden has not been seen publicly or photographed since his reported
arrival in Moscow on Sunday afternoon from Hong Kong, and passengers on that
flight interviewed at the airport could not confirm that he was on board.

On a visit to New Delhi, Secretary of State John Kerry emphasized on Monday that
the United States wants Russia to send Mr. Snowden to the United States. ''I
would urge them to live by the standards of the law,'' Mr. Kerry said.

Security was extremely tight Monday at the gate at Sheremetyevo Airport as gate
agents called for boarding the aircraft, part of a fleet shared by Aeroflot and
Delta. Police officers in green, wide-brimmed hats stood around the plane on the
tarmac and the entrance to the gate inside the terminal was cordoned off with
blue ribbon.

Mr. Snowden was said to have reserved a ticket on the flight, Aeroflot 150, in
coach seat 17A. But just before the plane pulled away, Nikolay Solkolov, an
Aeroflot employee at the gate, said that Mr. Snowden was not on board. ''He is
not there,'' Mr. Sokolov said. ''I was waiting myself. A police officer asked a
member of the ground crew if everyone had arrived. The reply was: 'Minus
five.'''

A reporter for The Associated Press posted a photo on Twitter showing the empty
seat supposedly reserved by Mr. Snowden.

The situation remained a confounding and undoubtedly infuriating one for U.S.
officials, who have charged Mr. Snowden with illegally disclosing classified
documents about U.S. surveillance programs.

Mr. Snowden was aided in his escape by WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy organization,
whose founder said he helped arrange special refugee travel documents issued by
Ecuador. There was no immediate comment from WikiLeaks on Mr. Snowden's
whereabouts. Earlier on Monday, the group posted a message on Twitter
criticizing the United States.

''US bullying Russia for Snowden's rendition is counterproductive. No
self-respecting state would accept such unlawful demands,'' the group wrote. The
use of ''rendition'' was an explicit reference to the way the United States has
handled terrorism suspects.

The unwillingness of the Hong Kong authorities to detain Mr. Snowden, and
Ecuador's public declaration that it was considering his asylum request,
underscored just how little sympathy the United States is finding in the
international community over the unveiling of its surveillance efforts.

Russia had seemed intent on allowing Mr. Snowden to transit through Moscow but
at the highest levels of the Russian government, officials seemed to be pulling
a page from a Cold War playbook, coyly denying any knowledge about Mr. Snowden.

''Over all, we have no information about him,'' Dmitri Peskov, the spokesman for
President Vladimir V. Putin, told Reuters early Monday.

Nikolay N. Zakharov, a spokesman for the Russian Federal Security Service,
declined to say if intelligence officials had met with Mr. Snowden during the
roughly 21 hours that he spent at the transit area of the airport or had sought
to get a look at any of the trove of secrets he is said to be carrying on
several computers.

''On this question, we will not comment,'' Mr. Zakharov said.

Although there were a scattering of tourists carrying bags from the duty-free
shops preparing to board the plane, a large number of the passengers were
journalists trailing Mr. Snowden on what was expected to be a Russia-to-Cuba leg
of his extraordinary odyssey, which began early Sunday when he fled his hideout
in Hong Kong.

Several journalists carrying U.S. passports were ejected from the aircraft
because of visa requirements to visit Cuba.

Diplomats and law enforcement officials from the United States warned countries
in Latin America not to harbor Mr. Snowden or allow him to pass through to other
destinations after he fled Hong Kong for Moscow, possibly en route to Ecuador or
another nation where he could seek asylum.

''The United States has been in touch via diplomatic and law enforcement
channels with countries in the Western Hemisphere through which Snowden might
transit or that could serve as final destinations. The U.S. is advising these
governments that Snowden is wanted on felony charges, and as such should not be
allowed to proceed in any further international travel, other than is necessary
to return him to the United States,'' a State Department official in Washington
said.

In New Delhi, Mr. Kerry said that the United States had extradited seven
individuals to Russia in response to Russian extradition requests. ''I think
reciprocity in the enforcement of the law is pretty important,'' he said.

Mr. Kerry said it was ironic that Mr. Snowden might have been seeking the
cooperation of China and Russia in his flight, given their positions in
restricting Internet freedom. William Burns, the deputy secretary of state, has
been in touch with the Russian authorities on the Snowden matter, Mr. Kerry
said.

It was unclear how Mr. Snowden spent his time at the airport or precisely where.
The departure of the flight to Havana from Moscow came after an all-night vigil
by journalists who were posted outside a hotel in the transit zone of the
airport where Mr. Snowden was apparently staying. But on Monday morning, hotel
staff said that no one named Snowden was staying there.

The White House, in its first official statement released just after midnight
Monday, expressed disappointment in Hong Kong's decision to allow Mr. Snowden to
leave and pressed Russia to turn him over.

The turn of events opened a startling new chapter in a case that had already
captivated many in the United States and around the world. Mr. Snowden's
transcontinental escape was seen as a fresh embarrassment for the Obama
administration and raised questions about its tactics in the case, like its
failure to immediately revoke Mr. Snowden's passport.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              699 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Hong Kong guided U.S. fugitive to exit;
In high-stakes meeting over pizza, he learned his options were limited

BYLINE: KEITH BRADSHER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1579 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG

ABSTRACT

During a planning meeting last week, Edward J. Snowden became deeply dismayed to
learn that he could spend years in prison without access to a computer.

FULL TEXT

For Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor who has
acknowledged leaking numerous documents about American surveillance operations
around the world, the path to a sudden departure from Hong Kong late Sunday
morning began over a dinner last Tuesday of a large pizza, fried chicken and
sausages, washed down with Pepsi.

Albert Ho, one of Mr. Snowden's lawyers, said that before the dinner began, Mr.
Snowden insisted that everyone place their cellphones in the refrigerator of the
home where he was staying, to block any eavesdropping. What followed was a
two-hour conversation during which Mr. Snowden was deeply dismayed to learn that
he could spend years in prison without access to a computer during litigation
over whether he would be granted asylum here or surrendered to the United
States, Mr. Ho said.

Staying in the cramped Hong Kong home of a local supporter was not bothersome to
Mr. Snowden, but the prospect of losing his computer scared him.

''He didn't go out, he spent all his time inside a tiny space, but he said it
was O.K. because he had his computer,'' Mr. Ho said. ''If you were to deprive
him of his computer, that would be totally intolerable.''

The outcome of that meeting, Mr. Ho said, was a decision by Mr. Snowden by
Friday morning to have Mr. Ho pose two questions to the Hong Kong government:
Would he be released on bail if he were detained in Hong Kong at the request of
the United States, and would the Hong Kong government interfere if Mr. Snowden
tried to go to the airport and leave Hong Kong instead.

A person with a detailed knowledge of the Hong Kong government's deliberations
said that the government had been delighted to receive the questions. Leung
Chun-ying, the chief executive, and his top advisers had been struggling through
numerous meetings for days, canceling or postponing most other work, while
trying to decide what to do in response to an American request for Mr. Snowden's
detention, even as public opinion in Hong Kong seemed to favor protecting the
fugitive.

But Mr. Snowden's choice of Mr. Ho to represent him raised a problem, said the
person knowledgeable about the government's deliberations, who insisted on
anonymity because of the diplomatic sensitivities in the case. Mr. Ho, a member
of the territory's legislature for nearly 20 years, is a former chairman of the
Democratic Party and a longtime campaigner for full democracy in Hong Kong, to
the irritation of government leaders of the territory, which was returned by
Britain to China in 1997.

''The Hong Kong government doesn't trust him,'' the person said, adding that the
Hong Kong government also did not want to be involved in any direct negotiations
with Mr. Snowden. So the government found an intermediary, someone with
longstanding connections to the local government but not in office, to bypass
Mr. Ho and contact Mr. Snowden through someone in the Hong Kong community who
was helping Mr. Snowden.

The intermediary told Mr. Snowden Friday night that the government could not
predict what Hong Kong's independent judiciary would do, but that serving jail
time while awaiting trial was a possibility. The intermediary also said that the
Hong Kong government would welcome Mr. Snowden's departure, Mr. Ho and the
person who insisted on anonymity said. Both declined to identify the
intermediary.

The Hong Kong government said that it would not interfere with Mr. Snowden's
departure and even provided unobtrusive police protection for him as he went
through the airport, both of them said.

But, Mr. Ho said, Mr. Snowden went through the same security and immigration
channels as most passengers at the airport, rather than a special channel
usually used for people involved in highly political cases - a sign that the
Hong Kong government wanted to minimize its involvement in Mr. Snowden's
departure.

At the same time, the Hong Kong government's encouragement for Mr. Snowden to
leave, instead of a suggestion that he stay and fight any return to the United
States, had persuaded him that staying was risky because the Hong Kong
government might not be on his side. ''He would not like to fight with the Hong
Kong government, with the Chinese government and the U.S. government'' against
him, Mr. Ho said.

Mr. Ho said that the disclosure late Friday evening of a sealed indictment
against Mr. Snowden in the United States had prompted his client to become
considerably more anxious about staying in Hong Kong, and the prospect of
spending years in courtrooms or possibly jail as well. ''He wanted a simple
life,'' Mr. Ho said.

Mr. Ho said that if the Hong Kong government had not assured Mr. Snowden of safe
passage to the airport and exit from the territory, his client intended to seek
the advice of Stephen M. Young, the U.S. consul general in Hong Kong, whom Mr.
Ho knows socially. But there was no clear plan on what to seek from Mr. Young,
and the Hong Kong government's assurance of safe passage meant that this plan
was never discussed in depth, Mr. Ho added.

Obama administration officials expressed profound annoyance Sunday that Hong
Kong let Mr. Snowden leave. But the person knowledgeable about the Hong Kong
government's deliberations said that there was considerable annoyance in Hong
Kong about Washington's handling of the case.

Mr. Ho said that Mr. Snowden had not been working for any government other than
his previous service for the United States. ''He believed he was doing the right
thing, serving the people,'' Mr. Ho said, later adding that, ''Certainly he is
not a spy for anybody - Russia, China.''

The Hong Kong government stalled for time by telling the United States on Friday
that it wanted more information to support the American request for Mr.
Snowden's detention. Obama administration officials complained Sunday that they
were still working to provide Hong Kong with the information when Mr. Snowden
was allowed to leave.

But the person familiar with Hong Kong's deliberations pointed out that when
Hong Kong made its request on Friday, it was still Thursday night in Washington.
So the United States could in theory have sent more information by Saturday
morning in Hong Kong, which would have required further review by the Hong Kong
government. But the information was not immediately sent by the United States,
the person said.

The Hong Kong and Chinese governments consulted very closely throughout Mr.
Snowden's stay.

From China's point of view, analysts said, the departure of Mr. Snowden solved
two concerns: How to prevent Beijing's relationship with the United States from
being ensnared in a long legal wrangle in Hong Kong over Mr. Snowden, and how to
deal with a Chinese public that widely regards the American computer expert as a
hero.

''Behind the door there was definitely some coordination between Hong Kong and
Beijing,'' said Jin Canrong, professor of international relations at Renmin
University in Beijing.

Beijing's chief concern was the stability of the relationship with the United
States, which the Chinese believed had been placed on a surer footing during the
meeting between President Xi Jinping and President Barack Obama at the
Sunnylands estate in California this month, said Mr. Jin and a person
knowledgeable about the Hong Kong government's handling of Mr. Snowden.

The Chinese government was pleased that Mr. Snowden disclosed the extent of
American surveillance of Internet and telephone conversations around the world,
giving the Chinese a chance to talk about what they describe as American
hypocrisy regarding surveillance practices, said Mr. Jin and a person familiar
with the consultations between Hong Kong and China.

But in the longer term, China's overall relationship with the United States,
which spans global economic, military and security issues, was more important
than the feelings of the public in China and Hong Kong, who felt that the
contractor should be protected from the reach of the United States, analysts
said.

Mainland Chinese officials ''will be relieved he's gone - the popular sentiment
in Hong Kong and China is to protect him because he revealed United States
surveillance here, but the governments don't want trouble in the relationship,''
said the person familiar with the consultations between Beijing and Hong Kong.

Mr. Snowden went public in Hong Kong on June 9, the day after the meeting
between Mr. Obama and Mr. Xi ended, as the source of a series of disclosures in
the British newspaper The Guardian and The Washington Post about classified
national security programs.

The stream of information about the extent of American worldwide eavesdropping
shifted the focus in the public sniping between the Obama administration and
China over cybersecurity that had been unfolding for months.

Mr. Ho, the lawyer, said that Mr. Snowden, who had just turned 30, came across
as intelligent, analytical and quick-witted. But he also came to Hong Kong from
Honolulu without a well thought-out plan, while overestimating how free he would
be to move around Hong Kong after his disclosures and underestimating the public
attention he would receive, Mr. Ho added.

''He's a kid, I really think he's a kid, I think he never anticipated this would
be such a big matter in Hong Kong,'' Mr. Ho said, adding that, ''He enjoys
Pepsi, he prefers Pepsi to wine, that's why I say he's a kid.''

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              700 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Beijing's hand seen in call to let fugitive depart;
Emphasis on maintaining diplomatic ties informed decision, observers say

BYLINE: JANE PERLEZ and KEITH BRADSHER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: BEIJING

ABSTRACT

Analysts said the Chinese government allowed Edward J. Snowden to leave Hong
Kong to prevent a long legal battle with the United States and to maintain
diplomatic ties.

FULL TEXT

The Chinese government made the final decision to allow Edward J. Snowden, the
former National Security Agency contractor, to leave Hong Kong, a move that
Beijing believed resolved a tough diplomatic problem even as it reaped a
publicity windfall from Mr. Snowden's disclosures, according to people familiar
with the situation.

The Hong Kong authorities have insisted that their judicial process remained
independent of China, but these observers - who like many in this article spoke
on the condition of anonymity to talk freely about confidential discussions -
said that matters of foreign policy are the domain of the Chinese government,
and Beijing exercised that authority in allowing Mr. Snowden to go on Sunday.

From China's point of view, analysts said, the departure of Mr. Snowden solved
two concerns: how to prevent Beijing's relationship with the United States from
being ensnared in a long legal wrangle in Hong Kong over Mr. Snowden, and how to
deal with a Chinese public that widely regards the American computer expert as a
hero.

''Behind the door there was definitely some coordination between Hong Kong and
Beijing,'' said Jin Canrong, professor of international relations at Renmin
University in Beijing.

Beijing's chief concern was the stability of the relationship with the United
States, which the Chinese believed had been placed on a surer footing during the
meeting between President Xi Jinping and President Barack Obama at the
Sunnylands estate in California this month, said Mr. Jin and a person
knowledgeable about the Hong Kong government's handling of Mr. Snowden.

The Chinese government was pleased that Mr. Snowden disclosed the extent of U.S.
surveillance of Internet and telephone conversations around the world, giving
the Chinese people a chance to talk about what they describe as U.S. hypocrisy
regarding surveillance practices, said Mr. Jin and the person familiar with the
consultations between Hong Kong and China.

But in the longer term, China's overall relationship with the United States,
which spans global economic, military and security issues, was more important
than the feelings of the public in China and Hong Kong, who felt that the
contractor should be protected from the reach of the United States, analysts
said.

Mainland Chinese officials ''will be relieved he's gone - the popular sentiment
in Hong Kong and China is to protect him because he revealed United States
surveillance here, but the governments don't want trouble in the relationship,''
said the person familiar with the consultations between Beijing and Hong Kong.

Mr. Snowden went public in Hong Kong on June 9, the day after the meeting
between Mr. Obama and Mr. Xi ended, as the source of a series of disclosures in
The Guardian, a British newspaper, and The Washington Post about classified
national security programs.

The stream of information about the extent of worldwide eavesdropping by the
United States shifted the focus in the public sniping between the Obama
administration and China over cybersecurity that had been unfolding for months.

In a series of speeches, senior officials in the Obama administration, including
the national security adviser, Thomas E. Donilon, and the defense secretary,
Chuck Hagel, had taken the offensive against China, publicly accusing it of
cyberespionage against U.S. businesses. Mr. Donilon said in a speech in March
that China was responsible for the theft of confidential business information
and proprietary technologies through digital intrusions on an ''unprecedented
scale.''

In response to those accusations, China said that it was the victim of
cyberattacks from the United States.

Mr. Snowden's disclosures appeared to confirm the Chinese government's argument
and put the United States on the defensive. The highly classified documents that
Mr. Snowden gave to the two newspapers showed that the N.S.A. compiled logs of
virtually all telephone calls in the United States and collected the e-mail of
foreigners from U.S. Internet companies.

Mr. Snowden has denied giving China classified documents and said he had spoken
only to journalists. But his public statements, directly and to reporters, have
contained intelligence information of great interest to China.

Two Western intelligence experts, who worked for major government spy agencies,
said they believed that the Chinese government had managed to drain the contents
of the four laptops that Mr. Snowden said he brought to Hong Kong, and that he
said were with him during his stay at a Hong Kong hotel.

If that were the case, they said, China would no longer need or want to have Mr.
Snowden remain in Hong Kong.

The disclosures by Mr. Snowden set off a surge of commentary against
''double-faced'' and ''arrogant'' behavior by the United States that was posted
by many users of China's version of Twitter.

In some instances, the Chinese news media made snide references to what it
called the gap between how the United States portrayed itself, and what the
United States practiced. ''Washington must be grinding its teeth because
Snowden's revelations have almost overturned the image of the U.S. as the
defender of a free Internet,'' Global Times, which often reflects the official
point of view, wrote in an editorial.

The precise details of how the Chinese government dealt with the Hong Kong
authorities were not immediately known.

But Beijing appears to have decided that weeks of focus on Mr. Snowden in Hong
Kong and his disclosures about the U.S. government's global surveillance
practices were enough, and that he could turn into a liability, said a second
person familiar with the handling of Mr. Snowden. ''Beijing has gotten the most
they can out of the Snowden situation,'' that person said.

A senior diplomat familiar with the way the Chinese government works said just
before the departure of Mr. Snowden became public that he believed that Beijing
would do all it could to keep Mr. Snowden out of U.S. hands. The Chinese public
would be outraged if the contractor was extradited, put on trial and jailed, he
said. At the same time, the Obama administration would put relentless pressure
on Beijing to get Mr. Snowden, he said.

''I see the sun of Sunnylands disappearing into the snow of Snowden,'' the
diplomat said.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              702 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

THE WORLD;
Where's Snowden?;
As the NSA leaker apparently skips flight, the U.S. slams China for letting him
out.

BYLINE: Richard A. Serrano, Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON


The seat Edward Snowden had booked in Row 17 was empty when Aeroflot Flight
SU150 roared down the runway in Moscow on Monday, leaving a tail wind of mystery
about the location of America's most famous fugitive and deepening White House
frustration as his embarrassing escapades chilled U.S. relations with China and
Russia.

At the White House, Press Secretary Jay Carney accused China of willfully
violating an international extradition pact by permitting Snowden to board a
flight in Hong Kong and fly to Moscow on Sunday. He said Chinese authorities
knew Snowden faced federal espionage charges for disclosing U.S. intelligence
programs that secretly collect domestic telephone logs and spy on foreigners'
Internet traffic.

"We are just not buying that this was a technical decision by a Hong Kong
immigration official," Carney said. "This was a deliberate choice by the
government to release a fugitive despite a valid arrest warrant, and that
decision unquestionably has a negative impact on the U.S.-China relationship."

Carney was less harsh on Russia, praising its help in the investigation of one
of the men who purportedly bombed the Boston Marathon on April 15. But Carney
said "it is our assumption" that Snowden is still in Russia and that President
Vladimir Putin's government has an obligation to turn him over to U.S.
authorities.

"We do expect the Russian government to look at all the options available to
expel Mr. Snowden back to the United States," Carney said.

The Obama administration had asked Hong Kong police to arrest the onetime
National Security Agency contract worker so they could seek his extradition to
face trial. But officials in Hong Kong, which is a special administrative region
of China, maintained that they were given "insufficient" evidence and let
Snowden board the flight to Moscow.

U.S. officials had revoked Snowden's U.S. passport the day before he fled, but
he reportedly had obtained a special refugee document that allowed him to
travel. U.S. officials had not asked Interpol, the international police agency,
to issue an alert that could have delayed or stopped his departure.

The latest chapter in the global spy mystery showed the apparent limits of the
diplomatic and law enforcement reach of the United States. The saga proved
irresistible for cable TV, which focused nearly nonstop on the case, and awkward
for President Obama, who had confronted Chinese President Xi Jinping at a
California summit early this month with U.S. concerns about Chinese cyber
espionage.

U.S. authorities are "following the appropriate legal channels and working with
various countries to make sure all the rules are followed," Obama told reporters
Monday.

Traveling in India, Secretary of State John F. Kerry was less diplomatic, saying
sarcastically, "I wonder if Snowden chose Russia or China for assistance because
they are such bastions of Internet freedom."

A Russian Foreign Ministry official, speaking on condition of anonymity, would
confirm only that Snowden was last seen at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.

"We know that until the last moment, Snowden was locked in consultations with
two Ecuadorean diplomats in the transit zone of the airport, undecided whether
he should fly today [Monday] or change the booking for a later date," the
ministry official said.

As the Aeroflot jet rolled across the tarmac for a delayed takeoff, a
correspondent for the Russian television news network Rossiya 24 reported that
Snowden had skipped the flight. "I have looked over all of the plane and found
no passengers answering Edward Snowden's description," Yevgeney Popov reported.

Local intelligence experts said they assumed Russian officials were already
debriefing Snowden and were delighted to have his four laptop computers and his
insider's view of the super-secret National Security Agency.

"This interesting fish has swum into our nets of its own accord and it would be
unthinkable of our special services to miss this rare chance to talk to a U.S.
defector associated with the CIA," said former Soviet spy Gen. Alexei Kondaurov,
although Snowden hasn't defected and mostly worked for the NSA.

If Russia does not deport Snowden to the United States, he may be headed to
Havana -- the destination he had booked on Monday -- and then to what apparently
is his next goal: political asylum in Ecuador.

Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino said Snowden had written to President
Rafael Correa formally requesting asylum.

In his request, which Patino read aloud, Snowden said he was being punished for
his "political opinions" and his decision to "exercise my right to freedom of
expression." He compared himself to Army Pfc. Bradley Manning, currently being
court-martialed for giving classified documents to the website WikiLeaks.

Snowden added that his criminal charges were filed in federal court in a
Washington suburb, and that his jury would probably consist of "members of the
CIA, the Pentagon and numerous government agencies and their contractors."
Should he go trial, he said, he would be "running the risk of life imprisonment
or death."

Patino said Ecuador was still reviewing the request.

The case has cast a new spotlight on WikiLeaks, which has given legal and
diplomatic assistance to Snowden. Although its founder, Julian Assange, has
taken refuge in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London to avoid extradition to Sweden
in a sexual assault investigation, the group has worked closely with Snowden to
help him avoid U.S. capture and prison.

In a conference call with reporters Monday, Assange said Snowden "is in a safe
place and his spirits are high," although he wouldn't say where.

"Edward Snowden is not a traitor," Assange said. "He is not a spy. He is a
whistle-blower who has told the public an important truth."

But Carney disputed that assessment, saying Snowden's flight from Hawaii, where
he had worked for the NSA, to China, Russia and, if he succeeds, Ecuador, shows
he was driven by ignoble motives to expose U.S. secrets. None of the countries,
he noted, allow freedom of expression.

"His failure to criticize these regimes suggests that his true motive throughout
has been to injure the national security of the United States, not to advance
Internet freedom and free speech," Carney said.

--

richard.serrano@latimes.com

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

Serrano reported from Washington and Loiko from Moscow. Times staff writers Mark
Magnier in New Delhi and Shashank Bengali in Washington and special
correspondents Chris Kraul and Pablo Jaramillo Viteri in Quito, Ecuador,
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              703 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden never crossed Russian border - Foreign Minister

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 575 words


Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has said that NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden did not cross the Russian border and that Russia has nothing to do with
him.

'I want to say that we don't have any connection either to Mr. Snowden, or to
his relations with American justice, or to his travels around the world. He
picked his route independently, we learned about it through the media, just like
most of the people here,' RIA Novosti quoted him as saying at a press conference
on Tuesday.

'He has not crossed the Russian border.'

Snowden did not acquire a Russian visa and, therefore, was unable to cross the
border into the country. He has apparently been holed up inside the
international transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport, according to various
sources.

The remarks came amid escalating tensions between Russia and the United States
over Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the US authorities
on espionage charges for revealing a highly classified surveillance program.

US Secretary of State John Kerry called Snowden a 'traitor' and urged Russia to
extradite him. 'There would be without any question some effect and impact on
the relationship' if it emerged that Russia allowed him to board a plane.

"We have a coordinated effort between the State Department and Justice
Department, the FBI, the White House in an effort to try to persuade our Russian
colleagues that this is important, important to the US, important to them, in
terms of upholding rule of law and we have returned 7 prisoners to them in the
last two years that they requested; I think its very important to them to adhere
to the rule of law and respect the relationship," he told CBS News on Monday.

Lavrov said that 'accusations' and 'threats' against Russia from US officials
were 'absolutely unfounded and unacceptable,' adding that Russia's assessment of
the situation had been passed on to the American side 'through appropriate
channels.'

Snowden, 30, was supposed to be on a 12-hour Havana-bound airplane from Moscow
on Monday, but the 30 journalists who boarded the plane saw no sign of him.

He was registered for seat 17A on the Aeroflot Moscow-Havana flight, but the
seat was empty when the airplane took off Monday afternoon, RIA Novosti
reported, citing its correspondent who had boarded the plane.

Nor could Snowden be found in the plane's business class.

According to an airport source, Snowden was still in Sheremetyevo's transit zone
as of Monday afternoon.

Snowden left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the United
States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport officials
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden was in the airport's
transit zone and would not be allowed to leave the premises because he did not
have a Russian visa.

Aeroflot confirmed Sunday that Snowden was registered for a Havana-bound flight
out of Sheremetyevo.

Earlier, anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of
classified US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was
'bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that
Snowden had requested asylum in Ecuador and pledged that his request would be
considered in the shortest time possible. The Ecuadorian Embassy in Moscow has
also confirmed it has no idea where Snowden is presently located, RIA Novosti
reported.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              723 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden never crossed Russian border - Foreign Minister

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 575 words


Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has said that NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden did not cross the Russian border and that Russia has nothing to do with
him.

'I want to say that we don't have any connection either to Mr. Snowden, or to
his relations with American justice, or to his travels around the world. He
picked his route independently, we learned about it through the media, just like
most of the people here,' RIA Novosti quoted him as saying at a press conference
on Tuesday.

'He has not crossed the Russian border.'

Snowden did not acquire a Russian visa and, therefore, was unable to cross the
border into the country. He has apparently been holed up inside the
international transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport, according to various
sources.

The remarks came amid escalating tensions between Russia and the United States
over Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the US authorities
on espionage charges for revealing a highly classified surveillance program.

US Secretary of State John Kerry called Snowden a 'traitor' and urged Russia to
extradite him. 'There would be without any question some effect and impact on
the relationship' if it emerged that Russia allowed him to board a plane.

"We have a coordinated effort between the State Department and Justice
Department, the FBI, the White House in an effort to try to persuade our Russian
colleagues that this is important, important to the US, important to them, in
terms of upholding rule of law and we have returned 7 prisoners to them in the
last two years that they requested; I think its very important to them to adhere
to the rule of law and respect the relationship," he told CBS News on Monday.

Lavrov said that 'accusations' and 'threats' against Russia from US officials
were 'absolutely unfounded and unacceptable,' adding that Russia's assessment of
the situation had been passed on to the American side 'through appropriate
channels.'

Snowden, 30, was supposed to be on a 12-hour Havana-bound airplane from Moscow
on Monday, but the 30 journalists who boarded the plane saw no sign of him.

He was registered for seat 17A on the Aeroflot Moscow-Havana flight, but the
seat was empty when the airplane took off Monday afternoon, RIA Novosti
reported, citing its correspondent who had boarded the plane.

Nor could Snowden be found in the plane's business class.

According to an airport source, Snowden was still in Sheremetyevo's transit zone
as of Monday afternoon.

Snowden left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the United
States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport officials
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden was in the airport's
transit zone and would not be allowed to leave the premises because he did not
have a Russian visa.

Aeroflot confirmed Sunday that Snowden was registered for a Havana-bound flight
out of Sheremetyevo.

Earlier, anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of
classified US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was
'bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that
Snowden had requested asylum in Ecuador and pledged that his request would be
considered in the shortest time possible. The Ecuadorian Embassy in Moscow has
also confirmed it has no idea where Snowden is presently located, RIA Novosti
reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              739 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden never crossed Russian border - Foreign Minister

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 575 words


Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has said that NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden did not cross the Russian border and that Russia has nothing to do with
him.

'I want to say that we don't have any connection either to Mr. Snowden, or to
his relations with American justice, or to his travels around the world. He
picked his route independently, we learned about it through the media, just like
most of the people here,' RIA Novosti quoted him as saying at a press conference
on Tuesday.

'He has not crossed the Russian border.'

Snowden did not acquire a Russian visa and, therefore, was unable to cross the
border into the country. He has apparently been holed up inside the
international transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport, according to various
sources.

The remarks came amid escalating tensions between Russia and the United States
over Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the US authorities
on espionage charges for revealing a highly classified surveillance program.

US Secretary of State John Kerry called Snowden a 'traitor' and urged Russia to
extradite him. 'There would be without any question some effect and impact on
the relationship' if it emerged that Russia allowed him to board a plane.

"We have a coordinated effort between the State Department and Justice
Department, the FBI, the White House in an effort to try to persuade our Russian
colleagues that this is important, important to the US, important to them, in
terms of upholding rule of law and we have returned 7 prisoners to them in the
last two years that they requested; I think its very important to them to adhere
to the rule of law and respect the relationship," he told CBS News on Monday.

Lavrov said that 'accusations' and 'threats' against Russia from US officials
were 'absolutely unfounded and unacceptable,' adding that Russia's assessment of
the situation had been passed on to the American side 'through appropriate
channels.'

Snowden, 30, was supposed to be on a 12-hour Havana-bound airplane from Moscow
on Monday, but the 30 journalists who boarded the plane saw no sign of him.

He was registered for seat 17A on the Aeroflot Moscow-Havana flight, but the
seat was empty when the airplane took off Monday afternoon, RIA Novosti
reported, citing its correspondent who had boarded the plane.

Nor could Snowden be found in the plane's business class.

According to an airport source, Snowden was still in Sheremetyevo's transit zone
as of Monday afternoon.

Snowden left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the United
States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport officials
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden was in the airport's
transit zone and would not be allowed to leave the premises because he did not
have a Russian visa.

Aeroflot confirmed Sunday that Snowden was registered for a Havana-bound flight
out of Sheremetyevo.

Earlier, anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of
classified US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was
'bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that
Snowden had requested asylum in Ecuador and pledged that his request would be
considered in the shortest time possible. The Ecuadorian Embassy in Moscow has
also confirmed it has no idea where Snowden is presently located, RIA Novosti
reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              754 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden never crossed Russian border - Foreign Minister

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 575 words


Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has said that NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden did not cross the Russian border and that Russia has nothing to do with
him.

'I want to say that we don't have any connection either to Mr. Snowden, or to
his relations with American justice, or to his travels around the world. He
picked his route independently, we learned about it through the media, just like
most of the people here,' RIA Novosti quoted him as saying at a press conference
on Tuesday.

'He has not crossed the Russian border.'

Snowden did not acquire a Russian visa and, therefore, was unable to cross the
border into the country. He has apparently been holed up inside the
international transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport, according to various
sources.

The remarks came amid escalating tensions between Russia and the United States
over Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the US authorities
on espionage charges for revealing a highly classified surveillance program.

US Secretary of State John Kerry called Snowden a 'traitor' and urged Russia to
extradite him. 'There would be without any question some effect and impact on
the relationship' if it emerged that Russia allowed him to board a plane.

"We have a coordinated effort between the State Department and Justice
Department, the FBI, the White House in an effort to try to persuade our Russian
colleagues that this is important, important to the US, important to them, in
terms of upholding rule of law and we have returned 7 prisoners to them in the
last two years that they requested; I think its very important to them to adhere
to the rule of law and respect the relationship," he told CBS News on Monday.

Lavrov said that 'accusations' and 'threats' against Russia from US officials
were 'absolutely unfounded and unacceptable,' adding that Russia's assessment of
the situation had been passed on to the American side 'through appropriate
channels.'

Snowden, 30, was supposed to be on a 12-hour Havana-bound airplane from Moscow
on Monday, but the 30 journalists who boarded the plane saw no sign of him.

He was registered for seat 17A on the Aeroflot Moscow-Havana flight, but the
seat was empty when the airplane took off Monday afternoon, RIA Novosti
reported, citing its correspondent who had boarded the plane.

Nor could Snowden be found in the plane's business class.

According to an airport source, Snowden was still in Sheremetyevo's transit zone
as of Monday afternoon.

Snowden left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the United
States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport officials
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden was in the airport's
transit zone and would not be allowed to leave the premises because he did not
have a Russian visa.

Aeroflot confirmed Sunday that Snowden was registered for a Havana-bound flight
out of Sheremetyevo.

Earlier, anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of
classified US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was
'bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that
Snowden had requested asylum in Ecuador and pledged that his request would be
considered in the shortest time possible. The Ecuadorian Embassy in Moscow has
also confirmed it has no idea where Snowden is presently located, RIA Novosti
reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              762 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Snowden never crossed Russian border - Foreign Minister

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 575 words


Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has said that NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden did not cross the Russian border and that Russia has nothing to do with
him.

'I want to say that we don't have any connection either to Mr. Snowden, or to
his relations with American justice, or to his travels around the world. He
picked his route independently, we learned about it through the media, just like
most of the people here,' RIA Novosti quoted him as saying at a press conference
on Tuesday.

'He has not crossed the Russian border.'

Snowden did not acquire a Russian visa and, therefore, was unable to cross the
border into the country. He has apparently been holed up inside the
international transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport, according to various
sources.

The remarks came amid escalating tensions between Russia and the United States
over Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the US authorities
on espionage charges for revealing a highly classified surveillance program.

US Secretary of State John Kerry called Snowden a 'traitor' and urged Russia to
extradite him. 'There would be without any question some effect and impact on
the relationship' if it emerged that Russia allowed him to board a plane.

"We have a coordinated effort between the State Department and Justice
Department, the FBI, the White House in an effort to try to persuade our Russian
colleagues that this is important, important to the US, important to them, in
terms of upholding rule of law and we have returned 7 prisoners to them in the
last two years that they requested; I think its very important to them to adhere
to the rule of law and respect the relationship," he told CBS News on Monday.

Lavrov said that 'accusations' and 'threats' against Russia from US officials
were 'absolutely unfounded and unacceptable,' adding that Russia's assessment of
the situation had been passed on to the American side 'through appropriate
channels.'

Snowden, 30, was supposed to be on a 12-hour Havana-bound airplane from Moscow
on Monday, but the 30 journalists who boarded the plane saw no sign of him.

He was registered for seat 17A on the Aeroflot Moscow-Havana flight, but the
seat was empty when the airplane took off Monday afternoon, RIA Novosti
reported, citing its correspondent who had boarded the plane.

Nor could Snowden be found in the plane's business class.

According to an airport source, Snowden was still in Sheremetyevo's transit zone
as of Monday afternoon.

Snowden left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the United
States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport officials
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden was in the airport's
transit zone and would not be allowed to leave the premises because he did not
have a Russian visa.

Aeroflot confirmed Sunday that Snowden was registered for a Havana-bound flight
out of Sheremetyevo.

Earlier, anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of
classified US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was
'bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that
Snowden had requested asylum in Ecuador and pledged that his request would be
considered in the shortest time possible. The Ecuadorian Embassy in Moscow has
also confirmed it has no idea where Snowden is presently located, RIA Novosti
reported.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              763 of 985 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Ottawa Edition

Snowden is no traitor. but he's no saint

SECTION: EDITORIALS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 760 words


When asked to explain why he divulged secret information about the
data-collection and surveillance operations of America's National Security
Agency (NSA), former CIA employee edward Snowden explained himself this way: "I
don't want to live in a society that does these sort of things [i.e., mass
surveillance]. I do not want to live in a world where everything I do and say is
recorded."

To Mr. Snowden's critics, those words are simply window dressing on an act of
traitorous criminality. But even these critics must concede that Mr. Snowden's
actions have brought to light information about mass-surveillance programs that
some Americans believe to be intrusive and ominous. Moreover, Mr. Snowden has
not profited financially from his actions: He gave up a six-figure job as an NSA
contractor.

To that extent, Mr. Snowden's actions suggest a man who is motivated by
civil-libertarian convictions, just as he claims.

Mr. Snowden's subsequent actions, however, have exposed him to charges of
hypocrisy. Despite claiming that he "do[es] not want to live in a world where
everything I do and say is recorded," he took off for Hong Kong, a Special
Administrative Region of China, which of course is a dictatorship. From there,
he flew to Russia, where Vladimir Putin has systematically dismantled or
co-opted the democratic institutions created in the years following Soviet rule.
Russia has plenty of activists such as edward Snowden: Almost all can be found
in jail, in exile, or in courts facing trumped up tax-evasion charges.

His odyssey then took on a note of farce, after Mr. Snowden reportedly was
booked on a flight to Cuba - another paragon of civil liberties. But when
Aeroflot Su150 took off on Monday, Mr. Snowden wasn't on it (thereby leaving the
various globe-trotting journalists who'd bought tickets with nothing to do
during the 12-and-ahalf hour flight to Havana but watch bad Russian movies).
Rumour has it that Mr. Snowden's ultimate destination is ecuador, a country
whose leftwing president has attacked journalists he dislikes with lawsuits and
even jail terms.

The idea that Mr. Snowden, or any other American, would find a greater level of
civil-liberties protection in any of these countries is laughable. All of them
are sympathetic to Mr. Snowden for one reason only - his ability, thanks to the
secrets he learned, to embarrass the united States. (China has been especially
gleeful in this regard, trumpeting Mr. Snowden's disclosures as a means to
deflect unrelated, and extremely wellfounded, u.S. accusations that China is
using stealth electronic methods to steal trade secrets from u.S. high-tech
companies.) Given the fact that Mr. Snowden deliberately chose a foreign media
outlet (Britain's Guardian newspaper) to air his revelations, it is hard to
escape the view that giving the united States a black eye on the international
stage was his intention.

Of course, America - and other democracies - have a long tradition of lionizing
"whistle-blowers." And, as noted above, Mr. Snowden certainly has brought to
light important disclosures about the scale of U.S. government surveillance. But
the very idea of "whistleblowing" presupposes that some rogue in the halls of
power has done something wrong - as, for instance, in the cases of Iran-Contra,
Watergate or (here in Canada) the Sponsorship scandal. But in this case, that
element is absent: The operations that Mr. Snowden has disclosed all seem to
have been approved by representatives from all three branches of the U.S.
government.

One can argue, as Mr. Snowden does, that policies permitting such extensive
forms of mass surveillance are wrong, even if implemented in a manner consistent
with the forms of constitutional governance. But surveys of American public
opinion suggest that Mr. Snowden's view is a minority one: Since 9/11, Americans
have embraced a social contract by which they give up some degree of privacy and
civil liberties in exchange for heightened protection from terrorism. Mr.
Snowden might not like how that social contract has evolved. But nothing gives
him the legal or moral right to compromise constitutionally legitimate domestic
surveillance operations in pursuit of libertarian civil activism.

To call Mr. Snowden a traitor is perhaps excessive. But he is no whistle-blowing
saint, either. Nor should he be seen as an example to others. If every
government worker with a security clearance privileged his political views over
his workplace duties, Western nations would quickly find themselves unable to
protect themselves from external threats.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2013 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              764 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

us intelligence leaks ecuador says snowden raises #124freedom of expression
issue Russian officials say he could travel without a valid passport

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 885 words


Agencies

Hanoi

Ecuador's foreign minister yesterday said that protection for fugitive US
intelligence leaker Edward Snowden was an issue of "freedom of expression" as
his government analyses a request for asylum by the whistleblower.

Snowden, a former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor, is in Russia after
arriving on Sunday from Hong Kong, hoping to win asylum in Ecuador and evade
arrest after leaking sensational details of secret US surveillance programmes of
Internet and phone data.

He has infuriated and embarrassed Washington with a series of leaks that have
strained diplomatic ties between the US and countries that have failed to
extradite him despite a warrant by American authorities.

"We will make a decision ... we are analysing it," Foreign Minister Ricardo
Patino told reporters through a translator in Hanoi of the asylum request by
Snowden.

"It [the request] has to do with freedom of expression and the security of
citizens around the world," he added.

"We always act by principle not in our own interest. There are some governments
who act more on their own interests, we do not."

Snowden was expected to fly from Moscow to Cuba and Venezuela en route to
possible asylum in Ecuador.

Snowden, also a former CIA technician, fled Hong Kong on Sunday to dodge US
efforts to extradite him on espionage charges. The anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks
also said it would help him.

Ecuador has rejected the United States' previous efforts at cooperation, and has
been helping WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, avoid prosecution by allowing
him to stay at its embassy in London.

Snowden gave documents to the Guardian and The Washington Post newspapers
disclosing US surveillance programmes that collect vast amounts of phone records
and online data in the name of foreign intelligence, often sweeping up
information on American citizens. Officials have the ability to collect phone
and Internet information broadly but need a warrant to examine specific cases
where they believe terrorism is involved.

Snowden had been in hiding for several weeks in Hong Kong, a former British
colony with a high degree of autonomy from mainland China. The United States
formally sought Snowden's extradition from Hong Kong to face espionage charges
but was rebuffed; Hong Kong officials said the US request did not fully comply
with their laws.

The Justice Department rejected that claim, saying its request met all of the
requirements of the extradition treaty between the US and Hong Kong. During
conversations last week, including a phone call between Attorney-General Eric
Holder and Hong Kong Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen, Hong Kong officials
never raised any issues regarding sufficiency of the US request, a Justice
representative said.

The United States was in touch through diplomatic and law enforcement channels
with countries that Snowden could travel through or to, reminding them that
Snowden is wanted on criminal charges and reiterating Washington's position that
he should only be permitted to travel back to the US, a State Department
official said. Snowden's US passport has been revoked.

US officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorised to
publicly discuss the case.

Russian officials said Snowden could still potentially make it to Ecuador
without a valid US passport.

"If he has asked for asylum in Ecuador then they could give him a refugee
document or even Ecuadoran citizenship allowing him to continue his journey," a
security source told the Interfax news agency.

Snowden's dramatic evasion of US authorities has stirred tensions between
Washington and Moscow and Beijing, which retains ultimate control over Hong
Kong.

An unidentified Aeroflot airline official was cited by Russia's state ITAR-Tass
news agency and Interfax as saying Snowden was on the plane that landed on
Sunday afternoon in Moscow. The Russian report said Snowden intended to fly to
Cuba and then on to Caracas, Venezuela.

The White House was hoping to stop Snowden before he left Moscow.

Caitlin Hayden, a spokeswoman for the National Security Council, said: "Given
our intensified cooperation after the Boston marathon bombings and our history
of working with Russia on law enforcement matters, including returning numerous
high-level criminals back to Russia at the request of the Russian government, we
expect the Russian government to look at all options available to expel Mr
Snowden back to the US to face justice for the crimes with which he is charged."

Still, the United States is likely to have problems interrupting Snowden's
passage. The US does not have an extradition treaty with Russia, but does with
Cuba, Venezuela and Ecuador. Even with an extradition agreement though, any
country could give Snowden a political exemption.

The likelihood that any of these countries would stop Snowden from travelling on
to Ecuador seemed remote. While diplomatic tensions have thawed in recent years,
Cuba and the United States are hardly allies after a half-century of distrust.
Another country that could see Snowden pass through, Venezuela, could prove
difficult, as well. Former president Hugo Chavez was a sworn enemy of the United
States and his successor, Nicolas Maduro, earlier this year called President
Barack Obama "grand chief of devils".

The two countries do not exchange ambassadors.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              765 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leaker's Hasty Exit Started With Pizza At Cramped Hide-Out

BYLINE: By KEITH BRADSHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1168 words


HONG KONG -- Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor
who has acknowledged leaking numerous documents about American surveillance
operations around the world, planned his escape from Hong Kong over a
surreptitious dinner of pizza, fried chicken and sausages, washed down with
Pepsi.

It was a cloak-and-dagger affair. Mr. Snowden wore a cap and sunglasses and
insisted that the assembled lawyers hide their cellphones in the refrigerator of
the home where he was staying, to block any eavesdropping. Then began a two-hour
conversation during which Mr. Snowden was deeply dismayed to learn that he could
spend years in prison without access to a computer during litigation over
whether he would be granted asylum here or surrendered to the United States.

Staying cooped up in the cramped Hong Kong home of a local supporter was less
bothersome to Mr. Snowden than the prospect of losing his computer.

''He didn't go out, he spent all his time inside a tiny space, but he said it
was O.K. because he had his computer,'' said Albert Ho, one of Mr. Snowden's
lawyers. ''If you were to deprive him of his computer, that would be totally
intolerable.''

After the meeting, Mr. Ho was sent to ask the Hong Kong government if Mr.
Snowden would be released on bail if he were arrested or whether he would be
allowed to leave the country.

A person with detailed knowledge of the Hong Kong government's deliberations
said that the government had been delighted to receive the questions. Leung
Chun-ying, the chief executive, and his top advisers had been struggling through
numerous meetings for days, canceling or postponing other meetings, while trying
to decide what to do in response to an American request for Mr. Snowden's
detention, even as public opinion in Hong Kong seemed to favor protecting the
fugitive.

But Mr. Snowden's choice of Mr. Ho to represent him raised a problem, said the
person with knowledge of the government's deliberations, who insisted on
anonymity because of the diplomatic sensitivities in the case. Mr. Ho, a member
of the territory's legislature for nearly 20 years, is a former chairman of the
Democratic Party and a longtime campaigner for full democracy here, to the
irritation of government leaders of the territory, which was returned by Britain
to China in 1997.

''The Hong Kong government doesn't trust him,'' the person said, adding that the
government also did not want to be involved in any direct negotiations with Mr.
Snowden. So it found an intermediary, someone with longstanding connections to
the local government but not in office, to bypass Mr. Ho and contact Mr. Snowden
.

The intermediary told Mr. Snowden on Friday night that the government could not
predict what Hong Kong's independent judiciary would do, but that serving jail
time while awaiting trial was a possibility. The intermediary also said that the
Hong Kong government would welcome Mr. Snowden's departure, Mr. Ho and the
person who insisted on anonymity said. Both declined to identify the
intermediary.

Mr. Snowden went through the same security and immigration channels as most
passengers at the airport, rather than a special channel usually used for people
involved in highly political cases -- a sign that the Hong Kong government
wanted to minimize its involvement in Mr. Snowden's departure, Mr. Ho said.

At the same time, the Hong Kong government's encouragement for Mr. Snowden to
leave had convinced him that staying was risky because the Hong Kong government
might not be on his side. ''He would not like to fight with the Hong Kong
government, with the Chinese government and the U.S. government'' against him,
Mr. Ho said.

Mr. Ho said that the disclosure late Friday evening of a sealed indictment
against Mr. Snowden in the United States had prompted his client to become
considerably more anxious about staying in Hong Kong.

Mr. Ho said that if the Hong Kong government had not assured Mr. Snowden of safe
passage to the airport and exit from the territory, his client intended to seek
the advice of Stephen Young, the United States consul general here, whom Mr. Ho
knows socially. But the Hong Kong government's assurance of safe passage meant
that this plan was never discussed in depth, Mr. Ho added.

Obama administration officials expressed annoyance on Sunday that Hong Kong let
Mr. Snowden get away. But the person with knowledge of the Hong Kong
government's deliberations said that there was considerable annoyance in Hong
Kong about Washington's handling of the case.

Mr. Ho said that Mr. Snowden had not been working for any government other than
the United States. ''He believed he was doing the right thing, serving the
people,'' Mr. Ho said, later adding, ''Certainly he is not a spy for anybody --
Russia, China.''

Mr. Snowden said in an interview published Monday by The South China Morning
Post that he took a job as a contractor for Booz Allen Hamilton in order to gain
access to N.S.A. surveillance programs.

''My position with Booz Allen Hamilton granted me access to lists of machines
all over the world the N.S.A. hacked,'' he said on June 12. ''That is why I
accepted that position about three months ago.''

Mr. Snowden, who just turned 30, came to Hong Kong from Honolulu without a
well-thought-out plan, while overestimating how free he would be to move around
Hong Kong after his disclosures and underestimating the public attention he
would receive, Mr. Ho added.

''I really think he's a kid, I think he never anticipated this would be such a
big matter in Hong Kong,'' Mr. Ho said.

When Mr. Snowden came to Hong Kong from Hawaii in late May, he looked up a
person whom he had met on a previous vacation here. That person, whom Mr. Ho
declined to identify but described as a well-connected Hong Kong resident,
became Mr. Snowden's ''carer.'' Mr. Snowden accepted an invitation to stay in
the home of one of that person's friends when he checked out of the Mira Hotel
on June 10, and the individual put him in touch with two local lawyers.

They were Robert Tibbo, a barrister who specializes in human rights and refugee
law, and Jonathan Man, an associate at Ho Tse Wai, Philip Li & Partners, one of
Hong Kong's best-known law firms.

Mr. Ho, a senior partner at that firm, said he met Mr. Snowden for the first
time on the evening of the pizza dinner.

Mr. Snowden said little until they had arrived at a home, where he took Mr. Man
aside and told him that ''all the phones should be put in the refrigerator, the
entire phones, and then he became very outspoken,'' Mr. Ho said.

When Mr. Snowden went to the airport, he had a plan to reach a country where he
believed he could obtain asylum, partly from discussions with Sarah Harrison, a
WikiLeaks adviser who had come to Hong Kong and begun assisting Mr. Snowden, Mr.
Ho said. As for Mr. Snowden's final intended destination, Mr. Ho said that it
was almost certainly not Iceland or Cuba and that Mr. Snowden intended only to
pass in transit through Moscow. He refused to discuss whether his destination
was Ecuador.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/25/world/asia/snowden
-departure-from-hong-kong.html

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Albert Ho, one of Edward  J. Snowden's lawyers, at a  rally on
June 15. The Hong  Kong government was said  not to trust Mr. Ho, a  longtime
campaigner for  full democracy there. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JESSICA HROMAS/GETTY
IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              766 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leaker's Flight Raises Tension For 3 Nations

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER and ELLEN BARRY; Peter Baker reported from Washington,
and Ellen Barry from Moscow. Reporting was contributed by Scott Shane, Steven
Lee Myers and Charlie Savage from Washington; David M. Herszenhorn from Moscow;
Michael R. Gordon from New Delhi; Rick Gladstone from New York; William Neuman
from Quito, Ecuador; and Victoria Burnett from Havana.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1811 words


WASHINGTON -- Frustrated Obama administration officials pressed Russia on Monday
to turn over Edward J. Snowden, the national security contractor who disclosed
surveillance programs, while warning China of ''consequences'' for letting him
flee to Moscow.

As Mr. Snowden remained out of sight, apparently holed up in Moscow awaiting
word of his fate, what started as a dramatic escape story involving a
self-described whistle-blower evolved into a diplomatic incident in which the
United States faces an open rift with one major power and a tense standoff with
another. Hopes for a quick resolution had faded by nightfall.

Secretary of State John Kerry said China's decision to allow Mr. Snowden to
leave Hong Kong despite an arrest request from the United States would have
''without any question some effect, an impact on the relationship, and
consequences.'' He called on Russia to expel Mr. Snowden. ''I would urge them to
live by the standards of the law, because that's in the interest of everybody,''
Mr. Kerry said.

He pointed out that the United States in the past two years had transferred
seven prisoners Russia had sought, though the parallel is not exact, since Mr.
Snowden is not being held by the Russian government.

At the White House, President Obama's press secretary, Jay Carney, reinforced
what he called ''our frustration and disappointment with Hong Kong and China,''
calling their refusal to detain Mr. Snowden a ''serious setback'' in relations.
He said the Hong Kong authorities had been notified that Mr. Snowden's passport
had been revoked, and he dismissed their explanation that they had no legal
basis to stop Mr. Snowden. ''We do not buy the suggestion that China could not
have taken action,'' Mr. Carney said.

American officials also openly mocked China and Russia as states that repress
free speech and transparency and therefore are hardly apt refuges for someone
fighting government secrecy in the United States.

''I wonder if Mr. Snowden chose China and Russia as assistants in his flight
from justice because they're such powerful bastions of Internet freedom,'' Mr.
Kerry said sarcastically during a stop in New Delhi.

Mr. Carney said Mr. Snowden's chosen destinations indicated ''his true motive
throughout has been to injure the national security of the United States.''

The strong words went beyond typical diplomatic language and underscored the
growing ramifications of the case for the United States. The Obama
administration's inability, at least for now, to influence China, Russia and
countries in Latin America that may accept Mr. Snowden for asylum, like Ecuador,
brought home the limits of American power around the world.

Ecuador's foreign minister, Ricardo Patiño, criticized the United States on
Monday for its pursuit of Mr. Snowden ''The one who is denounced pursues the
denouncer,'' Mr. Patiño said at a news conference in Hanoi, Vietnam, a stop on a
previously scheduled diplomatic visit to Asia. ''The man who tries to provide
light and transparency to issues that affect everyone is pursued by those who
should be giving explanations about the denunciations that have been
presented.''

Ecuador's president, Rafael Correa, wrote on his Twitter account, ''We will
analyze very responsibly the Snowden case and with absolute sovereignty will
make the decision we consider the most appropriate.'' The United States remains
Ecuador's leading trading partner, but Washington's influence in Quito has been
slight since Mr. Correa became president in 2007. He has repeatedly flouted and
tweaked the United States, by for example stopping American antidrug flights out
of a military base in Manta, and expelling the American ambassador in 2011 after
WikiLeaks cables suggested she felt Mr. Correa had tolerated police corruption.
.

A range of American officials, including the deputy secretary of state and the
F.B.I. director, spent Monday reaching out to their Russian counterparts seeking
cooperation, without any apparent result. Mr. Snowden, who spent Sunday night in
the transit zone of Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, did not board the flight for
Havana he was said to have booked, and he made no public appearance or
statement.

American officials said they believed he was still in Moscow, but it was unclear
whether his failure to continue on to Cuba, Ecuador or elsewhere was a sign that
Russia was considering handing him over to the United States, sheltering him
itself, planning to allow him to leave later or trying to extract information
from him before deciding. The United States and Russia do not have an
extradition treaty.

Nikolay N. Zakharov, a spokesman for Russia's Federal Security Service, or
F.S.B., declined to say if intelligence officials had met with Mr. Snowden, nor
would he say if they had sought to examine any secret files he was said to be
carrying. ''On this question, we will not comment,'' Mr. Zakharov said.

American intelligence officials remained deeply concerned that Mr. Snowden could
make public more documents disclosing details of the National Security Agency's
collection system or that his documents could be obtained by foreign
intelligence services, with or without his cooperation.

Technical experts have been carrying out a forensic analysis of the trail he
left in N.S.A. computer systems, trying to determine what he had access to as a
systems administrator for Booz Allen Hamilton, a United States government
contractor, and what he may have downloaded, officials said.

The South China Morning Post reported Monday night on its Web site that in an
interview, Mr. Snowden said he had specificallysought the job at Booz Allen so
he could collect information about the N.S.A's secret surveillance programs to
release to news outlets.

Glenn Greenwald, a columnist for The Guardian, has said Mr. Snowden gave him
thousands of documents, only a tiny fraction of which were published. Many may
be of limited public interest, but they could be of great value to a foreign
intelligence service, which could get a more complete idea of the security
agency's technical abilities and how to evade its net, officials said.

Mr. Snowden's flight from Hong Kong to Moscow on Sunday put the United States at
odds with onetime cold war rivals just as Mr. Obama was trying to ease tensions
over a variety of other friction points. In the last few weeks, he hosted
President Xi Jinping of China on a visit to California and met with President
Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in Northern Ireland. But talk of constructive
relations seemed long ago on Monday.

Critics said the episode exposed the president's failure in foreign policy. ''It
turns out that an irresolute amateur like Barack Obama was the best thing that
the brutal but determined Putin could have hoped for,'' Peter Wehner, a former
aide to President George W. Bush, wrote in Commentary magazine.

Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, sent a letter to Russia's
ambassador, Sergei I. Kislyak, warning of a break if Moscow did not send Mr.
Snowden back to the United States. ''The Snowden case is an important test of
the 'reset' in relations between our two countries,'' Mr. Graham wrote.

Mr. Obama's team seemed angrier at China than Russia, which for the moment had
not directly defied Washington. Officials disclosed more information about their
request to Hong Kong to detain and return Mr. Snowden, defending themselves
against assertions that they had mishandled the request.

A senior official said the State Department had raised the issue of arresting
Mr. Snowden with the Chinese after espionage charges were filed in secret on
June 14. The official said that as soon as the charges were unsealed on Friday,
the department revoked Mr. Snowden's passport, and that legally it could not
have done so earlier. Officials added that they had informed the Hong Kong
authorities that the passport had been revoked before Mr. Snowden was allowed to
board an Aeroflot flight for Moscow.

''The Chinese have emphasized the importance of building mutual trust,'' Mr.
Carney said. ''And we think that they have dealt that effort a serious setback.
If we cannot count on them to honor their legal extradition obligations, then
there is a problem. And that is a point we are making to them very directly.''

Officials also defended their decision not to seek a ''red notice,'' or
international arrest warrant, from Interpol, saying they typically do so only
when the whereabouts of the fugitive being sought is unknown.

Jacques Semmelman, an extradition specialist and a former federal prosecutor,
said that was generally correct, but he added that the United States still could
have sought a red notice if it feared Mr. Snowden might flee, so the warrant
would be in place wherever he landed. But Mr. Semmelman said the United States
had good reason not to fear that Mr. Snowden might flee because of its 1996
treaty with Hong Kong, under which it had requested his provisional arrest.

He said that the information required to make such a request was simple --
''it's a one- or two-pager that is very easy to comply with"-- and that it was
''inconceivable'' to him that American officials had not filled it out
correctly. If the Hong Kong authorities were willing to overlook a proper
request, then a revocation of Mr. Snowden's passport or a red notice might not
have made a difference. ''I haven't seen anything to show the United States
dropped the ball,'' he said.

Critics of the surveillance programs exposed by Mr. Snowden moved in Congress on
Monday to curtail them. Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont and
chairman of the Judiciary Committee, introduced legislation intended to bolster
privacy safeguards and require oversight.

Two other Democrats who joined him on the bill, Senators Ron Wyden of Oregon and
Mark Udall of Colorado, sent a letter to Gen. Keith B. Alexander, the N.S.A.
director, asserting that a government fact sheet about its surveillance of
foreigners abroad ''contains an inaccurate statement.'' They did not identify
the inaccuracy because of secrecy rules but said ''it portrays protections for
Americans' privacy as being significantly stronger than they actually are.''

At Sheremetyevo airport, where journalists had maintained an all-night vigil,
security was tight Monday as agents called passengers to board an Aeroflot
flight that Mr. Snowden reportedly had planned to take to Havana. Police
officers stood around the plane on the tarmac, and the entrance to the gate
inside the terminal was cordoned off with about 25 feet of blue ribbon.

But before the plane pulled away, an Aeroflot employee said Mr. Snowden was not
on board, which one of the flight's two captains confirmed when the plane landed
16 hours later in Havana.

In response to reporters' shouted questions, ''Was Snowden on board?'' the
captain, who would not give his name, replied: ''No Snowden. No special people.
Only journalists.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/25/world/edward-snowden
-nsa-surveillance-leak.html

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: With Edward J. Snowden apparently in hiding in Moscow,
journalists gathered Monday at the Ecuadorean Embassy there. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
JAMES HILL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


                              767 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

Ecuador says it"s "analysing" US whistleblower"s request for asylum

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 702 words


Ecuador"s Foreign Minister said his country was "analysing" a request for asylum
by fugitive United States intelligence leaker Edward Snowden, who was expected
to leave Moscow for Cuba last night.

"We will make a decision ... we are analysing it," Ricardo Patino said of the
request by Snowden, who is on the run from US authorities over his explosive
leaks on American intelligence methods.

"It [the request] has to do with freedom of expression and the security of
citizens around the world. We always act by principle, not in our own interest.
There are some governments who act more on their own interests, we do not," he
added.

Snowden, a former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor, arrived in Russia
on Sunday night from Hong Kong, hoping to win asylum in Ecuador and evade arrest
after leaking sensational details of secret US surveillance programmes.

He was expected to head to Ecuador via Cuba and AFP correspondents at Moscow"s
Sheremetyevo Airport saw an Ecuadorean-flagged diplomatic car at VIP arrivals.

"We know he is in Moscow, we"re in talks with higher authorities," said Patino,
who is in Hanoi on an official visit to communist Vietnam.

Fellow passengers on Flight SU213 from Hong Kong to Moscow said that when the
plane touched down, Snowden climbed into a BMW with diplomatic number plates
which drove on to the tarmac.

Cars from the Ecuadorean Embassy pulled up outside the terminal building,
accompanied by Russian government cars.

The South American country, led by outspoken leftist President Rafael Correa,
has been sheltering WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is wanted by Sweden,
at its London Embassy for the past year.

Snowden was with Sarah Harrison, a British researcher who has worked with
Assange. WikiLeaks said its staff had helped Snowden in arranging safe passage
to Ecuador.

US authorities have been severely embarrassed by Snowden"s revelations of
intelligence trawling by the NSA of phone call logs and internet data, prompting
concern from governments worldwide and outrage from privacy campaigners.

He made the revelations from Hong Kong, which let him travel to Moscow,
prompting criticism from US authorities who have laid charges including theft
and espionage against the whistleblower. The White House said it expected the
Russian Government to "look at all options available" to send Snowden back to
the US to face espionage charges.

National Security Council spokesman Caitlin Hayden said the US also registered
strong objections to authorities in Hong Kong and China through diplomatic
channels at the decision to let Snowden flee.

Snowden"s route to Quito was expected to take him through communist Cuba, which
would be unlikely to heed US requests for help.

Hong Kong said the original US request had failed to "fully comply" with local
law and the US Department of Justice had not supplied further information it had
asked for.

But Washington insisted the request "met the requirements of the agreement",
which normally only requires the country requesting the extradition to provide
basic details of the allegations.

The US Government said it had already cancelled Snowden"s passport, raising
questions about how he had been able to exit Hong Kong. Some believe Hong Kong
let him go to avoid a drawn-out and controversial extradition battle.

What is the situation with Edward Snowden"s US passport?

Snowden"s passport was annulled before he left Hong Kong for Russia, a US
official told AP. State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki refused to comment on
Snowden"s passport specifically but said individuals facing arrest warrants
could have their passport withdrawn.

How does that affect his travel?

While it could complicate his travel plans, the lack of a passport alone could
not thwart his plans, the US official told AP. If a senior official in another
country or with an airline orders it, a country could overlook the withdrawn
passport.

Where is Snowden headed?

Snowden was said to have landed in Moscow but was not seen leaving the airport.
Snowden"s allies said he was heading for Ecuador, where the Government had
received an asylum request. The State Department said the US was in touch with
countries Snowden might travel through or to.

- additional reporting AFP

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              768 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

US urges nations to return Snowden

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 1235 words


The US has grasped for help from both adversaries and uneasy allies in an effort
to catch fugitive National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden. The White
House demanded that he be denied asylum, blasted China for letting him go and
urged Russia to "do the right thing" and send him back to America to face
espionage charges.

Snowden was believed to be in Russia, where he fled after weeks of hiding out in
Hong Kong following his disclosure of the broad scope of two highly classified
counterterror surveillance programs to two newspapers. The programs collect vast
amounts of Americans" phone records and worldwide online data in the name of
national security.

Snowden had flown from Hong Kong to Russia, and was expected to fly early Monday
to Havana, from where he would continue on to Ecuador, where he has applied for
asylum. But he didn"t get on that plane and his exact whereabouts were unclear.

The founder of WikiLeaks, the secret-spilling organisation that has embraced
Snowden, said the American was only passing through Russia on his way to an
unnamed destination to avoid the reach of US authorities. Julian Assange said
Snowden had applied for asylum in Ecuador, Iceland and possibly other countries.

Despite its diplomatic tough talk, the US faces considerable difficulty in
securing cooperation on Snowden from nations with whom it has chilly relations.

The White House said Hong Kong"s refusal to detain Snowden had "unquestionably"
hurt relations between the United States and China. While Hong Kong has a high
degree of autonomy from the rest of China, experts said Beijing probably
orchestrated Snowden"s exit in an effort to remove an irritant in Sino-US
relations. President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping met earlier
this month in California to smooth over rough patches in the countries"
relationship, including allegations of hacking into each other"s computer
systems.

Secretary of State John Kerry urged Moscow to "do the right thing" amid
high-level pressure on Russia to turn over Snowden.

"We"re following all the appropriate legal channels and working with various
other countries to make sure that the rule of law is observed," Obama told
reporters when asked if he was confident that Russia would expel Snowden.

Obama"s spokesman, Jay Carney, said the US was expecting the Russians "to look
at the options available to them to expel Mr. Snowden back to the United States
to face justice for the crimes with which he is charged".

Carney was less measured about China.

"The Chinese have emphasized the importance of building mutual trust," he said.
"And we think that they have dealt that effort a serious setback. ...This was a
deliberate choice by the government to release a fugitive despite a valid arrest
warrant, and that decision unquestionably has a negative impact on the US-China
relationship."

Snowden has acknowledged revealing details of top-secret surveillance programs
that sweep up millions of phone and Internet records daily. He is a former CIA
employee who later was hired as a contractor through Booz Allen to be a computer
systems analyst. In that job, he gained access to documents - many of which he
has given to The Guardian and The Washington Post to expose what he contends are
privacy violations by an authoritarian government.

Snowden also told the South China Morning Post that "the NSA does all kinds of
things like hack Chinese cellphone companies to steal all of your SMS data," and
is believed to have more than 200 additional sensitive documents.

Assange and attorneys for WikiLeaks assailed the US as "bullying" foreign
nations into refusing asylum to Snowden. WikiLeaks counsel Michael Ratner said
Snowden is protected as a whistleblower by the same international treaties that
the US has in the past used to criticize policies in China and African nations.

The US government"s dual lines of diplomacy - harsh with China, hopeful with the
Russians - came just days after Obama met separately with leaders of both
countries in an effort to close gaps on some of the major disputes facing them.
Additionally, State Department spokesman Patrick Ventrell said the US has made
demands to "a series of governments," including Ecuador, that Snowden be barred
from any international travel other than to be returned to the US.

Ventrell said he did not know if that included Iceland. Icelandic officials have
confirmed receiving an informal request for asylum conveyed by WikiLeaks, which
has strong links to the tiny North Atlantic nation. But authorities there have
insisted that Snowden must be on Icelandic soil before making a formal request.

Ecuador"s president and foreign minister declared that national sovereignty and
universal principles of human rights - not US prodding - would govern any
decision they might make on granting asylum to Snowden.

Ecuador has rejected some previous US efforts at cooperation and has been
helping Assange avoid prosecution by allowing him to stay at its embassy in
London.

Formally, Snowden"s application for Ecuadoran asylum remains only under
consideration. But Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino made little effort to
disguise his government"s position. He told reporters in Hanoi that the choice
Ecuador faced in hosting Snowden was "betraying the citizens of the world or
betraying certain powerful elites in a specific country".

President Rafael Correa said on Twitter that "we will take the decision that we
feel most suitable, with absolute sovereignty." Correa, who took office in 2007,
is a frequent critic of US foreign policy in Latin America and is an ally of
leftist president Evo Morales of Bolivia. Correa also had aligned himself with
Venezuela"s late leader, Hugo Chavez, a chief US antagonist in the region for
years.

In April 2011 the Obama administration expelled the Ecuadorean ambassador to
Washington after the US envoy to Ecuador, Heather Hodges, was expelled for
making corruption allegations about senior Ecuadorean police authorities in
confidential documents disclosed by WikiLeaks.

American experts said the US will have limited, if any, influence to persuade
governments to turn over Snowden if he heads to Cuba or nations in South America
that are seen as hostile to Washington.

"There"s little chance Ecuador would give him back" if that country agrees to
take him, said James F. Jeffrey, a former ambassador and career diplomat.

Steve Saltzburg, a former senior Justice Department prosecutor, said it"s little
surprise that China refused to hand over Snowden, and he predicted Russia won"t
either.

"We"ve been talking the talk about how both these countries abuse people who try
to express their First Amendment rights, so I think that neither country is
going to be very inclined to help us very much," said Saltzburg, now a law
professor at George Washington University in Washington. "That would be true
with Cuba if he ends up there."

The United States formally sought Snowden"s extradition but was rebuffed by Hong
Kong officials who said the US request did not fully comply with their laws. The
Justice Department rejected that claim, saying its request met all of the
requirements of the extradition treaty between the US and Hong Kong.

Snowden had been believed to have been in a transit area in Moscow"s airport
where he would not be considered as entering Russian territory. Assange declined
to discuss where Snowden was but said he was safe. The US has revoked his
passport.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              769 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                            South China Morning Post

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday

A dinner date with a lot on their plate;
Lawmaker and lawyer Albert Ho tells of helping Snowden make his escape, with the
logistics discussed over pizza and fried chicken

BYLINE: Lana Lam lana.lam@scmp.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 05

LENGTH: 570 words


New details have emerged about Edward Snowden's final days in Hong Kong,
including the identity of the man who escorted the whistle-blower to Chep Lap
Kok airport on Sunday morning to board a Moscow-bound flight.

As speculation continued over which country will take in the fugitive,
Democratic Party lawmaker and lawyer Albert Ho Chun-yan confirmed that he asked
Jonathan Man, an associate at his law firm Ho, Tse, Wai & Partners, to accompany
Snowden to the airport in case he was arrested.

Ho said Man had worked closely with Snowden during his time in Hong Kong so he
was the ideal choice to be with Snowden if police did detain him.

Ho first met Snowden at a private home on Tuesday night when he sat down to
dinner with him.

Man and another lawyer, Robert Tibbo, were also at the dinner, where the four
tucked into pizza, fried chicken, sausages and Pepsi and for two hours discussed
Snowden's legal options.

The dinner came the night before US officials reportedly asked about the
possibility of Snowden's extradition from Hong Kong.

The New York Times reported that the dinner guests were asked to place their
mobile phones in the fridge to prevent them from being tracked. The Times also
said Snowden expressed concern that he might not be able to get bail and being
forced to spend months or years in prison without access to a computer.

It was during this get-together that Snowden asked Ho to seek clarification
about the Hong Kong government's position regarding extradition and whether it
would "vigorously oppose" a bail application.

Snowden also wanted to know if he would be granted safe passage to leave Hong
Kong and if this was what the administration wanted him to do.

The day after the dinner, US Attorney General Eric Holder reportedly called Hong
Kong Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen Kwok-keung to discuss extradition.

According to a Justice Department official, Holder stressed the importance of
the case and urged Hong Kong to honour the request for Snowden's arrest, Reuters
reported.

After Tuesday's dinner, Ho said he remained in contact with Snowden through
"various means", which is understood to include phone calls and secure online
exchanges.

Ho lined up a meeting with a "top government official" to discuss Snowden's
case.

That meeting on Friday came before court documents detailing US charges of
espionage and theft were unsealed, an important development which prompted
Snowden's decisions on Saturday.

At Friday's meeting, which lasted less than 30 minutes, Ho said the official
asked if he had written authorisation to act on Snowden's behalf and Ho said
yes.

But he did not bring a copy of the authorisation to that meeting and the
official did not ask to see it.

Also on Friday, Snowden received a message through a "middle-man" claiming to
represent the Hong Kong government that he would be able to leave without fear
of arrest, but he questioned the reliability of that message.

By Saturday morning, Snowden was becoming increasingly anxious and nervous and
made plans to leave.

He asked Ho to push his government contact for a green light on his safe passage
out of Hong Kong and got ready to board a Saturday night flight.

This move was delayed because Ho was unable to get a response from his
government contact. But by Sunday morning, Snowden had made up his mind.

Ho called Man and asked him to accompany Snowden to the airport, so if police
did intercede the lawyer could help him.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 South China Morning Post Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              770 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                telegraph.co.uk

                       June 25, 2013 Tuesday 2:43 AM GMT

Search still on for Edward Snowden as Aeroflot plane lands in Cuba without
whistleblower on board;
An Aeroflot flight from Moscow that was being closely tracked by media
organisations in case Edward Snowden, the former security contractor who
revealed details of U.S. surveillance programs, was on board, landed in Cuba
without him.

BYLINE: Agencies

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 769 words


Russian reporters on board the flight and foreign press gathered at Havana
airport reported no sightings of Snowden or any unusual security.

When the captain of the Aeroflot plane emerged from customs he was surrounded by
photographers. He pulled out his own camera, took picture of the photographers
and said "No Snowden, no."

Members of the aircraft's crew also told reporters on the plane soon after
take-off that Snowden was not on board.

The founder of the WikiLeaks secret-spilling organisation, Julian Assange,
earlier insisted that, though he couldn't go into details about where Snowden
was, knew said he was safe elsewhere. Snowden has applied for asylum in Ecuador,
Iceland and possibly other countries, Assange said.

A member of the Aeroflot crew spoke briefly to reporters gathered outside
Havana's Jose Marti International Airport, but would not give his name. "No
special people on board," he said, smiling. "Only journalists."

Security around the aircraft was heavy prior to boarding in Moscow and guards
tried to prevent the scrum of photographers and cameramen from taking pictures
of the plane, heightening speculation that Snowden might have been secretly
escorted on board.

But about two dozen journalists who made the flight had searched up and down the
plane after boarding in a hunt for Snowden. When it dawned on the journalists
that Snowden wasn't there, they settled in for a long haul flight to Cuba for
nothing. Some read, others chatted.

"A substantial percentage of people on board were journalists," AP reporter Max
Seddon said. "The flight would have been empty without us."

In Havana, Cuban officers also clamped down, forcing journalists waiting for the
flight to arrive to move outside the airport building.

The Interfax news agency, which has extensive contacts with Russian security
agencies, cited a source as saying Snowden could have flown out in a different
plane unseen by journalists.

Others speculated Russian security agencies might want to keep Snowden in Russia
for a more thorough debriefing.

Snowden had not been seen since he arrived in Moscow on Sunday from Hong Kong,
where he was in hiding for several weeks to evade U.S. justice and left to dodge
efforts to extradite him.

After spending a night in Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport, he had been expected to
fly to Cuba and Venezuela en route to possible asylum in Ecuador.

Interfax quoted an unidentified "well-informed source" in Moscow saying that
Russia received a U.S. request to extradite Snowden and responded by saying it
would consider that. But the same source said Russia could not detain and
extradite Snowden since he hadn't technically crossed the Russian border.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said Monday it would be "deeply troubling" if
Russia or Hong Kong had notice of Snowden's plans and that would affect their
relations with the United States.

The controversy over Snowden could further hurt U.S.-Russian relations, already
strained over arguments about Syria and a ban on U.S. adoptions of Russian
children.

Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino said his government had received an
asylum request, adding that the decision "has to do with freedom of expression
and with the security of citizens around the world."

Ecuador has rejected the United States' previous efforts at cooperation, and has
been helping Assange avoid prosecution by allowing him to stay at its embassy in
London.

Icelandic officials have confirmed receiving an informal request for asylum
conveyed by WikiLeaks, which has strong links to the tiny North Atlantic nation.
But authorities there have insisted that Snowden must be on Icelandic soil
before lodging a formal request.

Snowden leaked documents disclosing U.S. surveillance programs that collect vast
amounts of phone records and online data in the name of foreign intelligence,
often sweeping up information on American citizens.

Officials have the ability to collect phone and internet information broadly but
need a warrant to examine specific cases where they believe terrorism is
involved.

Snowden had been in hiding for several weeks in Hong Kong, a former British
colony with a high degree of autonomy from mainland China.

The United States formally sought Snowden's extradition from Hong Kong to face
espionage charges but was rebuffed; Hong Kong officials said the U.S. request
did not fully comply with their laws.

The Justice Department rejected that claim, saying its request met all of the
requirements of the extradition treaty between the U.S. and Hong Kong.

Edited by Steve Wilson for telegraph.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              771 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Focus should be on government secrecy,not Snowden, whistleblower advocates say

BYLINE: Joe Davidson

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 950 words


Edward Snowden poses critical questions for whistleblower advocates.

A former CIA employee and National Security Agency contractor, Snowden has
admitted leaking secret documents to The Washington Post and Britain's Guardian
news organization. Much to the chagrin of U.S. officials, who have charged him
under the Espionage Act, he fled Hong Kong after the Obama administration
pressed Chinese officials to detain him.

Some members of Congress and Secretary of State John F. Kerry say Snowden has
betrayed his country. Whistleblower advocates acknowledge that he might have
committed a crime, yet they firmly identify Snowden as a whistleblower.

This presents a dilemma.

Whistleblower advocates have a long history of supporting federal employees and
others who expose waste, fraud and abuse. They don't encourage breaking the law.
Yet, in Snowden's case, they see two possible wrongdoers: Snowden, for revealing
government secrets; and Uncle Sam, for the massive surveillance program Snowden
exposed.

"There must be a strong prohibition against the government using its
classification powers to classify a criminal action as
'secret,'â[#x20ac][#x160]" said Stephen M. Kohn, executive director of the
National Whistleblowers Center.

Advocates frame Snowden's conduct in a context larger than his potential
criminal liability. The Government Accountability Project (GAP), a whistleblower
protection and advocacy organization, said that "his actions alone brought about
the long-overdue national debate about the proper balance between privacy and
civil liberties, on the one hand, and national security on the other. Charging
Snowden with espionage is yet another effort to retaliate against those who
criticize the overreach of U.S. intelligence agencies under this
administration."

Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.), a strong supporter of whistleblowers, has a
different take. She "knows there's a difference between someone who stumbles
upon government wrongdoing and someone who knowingly commits a crime and
violates our national security - and may even have set out to do so," said Drew
Pusateri, her spokesman.

Federal employee whistleblowers, generally, have certain protections against
retaliation for exposing abuse. National security contractors have few, if any.
But even if the protections available to others covered Snowden, how could he be
afforded those protections if he has broken the law? The government's
retaliation would be his arrest and possible conviction on espionage charges.

"Mr. Snowden's disclosures of the National Security Agency's domestic
surveillance are certainly whistleblowing, but releasing classified information
is also against the law," said Danielle Brian, executive director of the Project
on Government Oversight. "As was the case with Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon
Papers, sometimes it is so important to make the information public that it is
necessary to break the law. . . . Whenever a whistleblower illegally discloses
classified information, the public interest must be weighed against the harm to
our national security."

Ellsberg was charged under the Espionage Act but not convicted.

With all the fuss about Snowden as a fugitive, his disclosures about the massive
collection of telephonic and electronic data of Americans and others by the
government is not getting the attention it deserves, in the view of
whistleblower advocates.

Because he apparently had a reasonable belief that the government was engaged in
wrongdoing, "Edward Snowden is a legitimate whistleblower," said Louis Clark,
GAP's president, who contends that "Snowden is the target of those who wish to
sweep his assertions under the rug and turn the media spotlight on him instead.
We believe the focus needs to be on the revelations and their implications.
History will eventually be on Snowden's side."

Perhaps, but in the meantime the law is not.

For the advocates, Snowden's actions draw attention to another issue facing
national security whistleblowers and the public they seek to serve.

"The problem whistleblowers face [is] the ability of the government to
over-classify information and thereby use the power of classification to stifle
legitimate whistleblowing," Kohn said. "An objective and fair declassification
process must exist, to ensure that the government does not use its powers to
hide wrongdoing."

Government officials don't consider Snowden a whistleblower, and certainly not
one who used proper channels to express his concerns.

"There are procedures available for individuals like Edward Snowden to use if
they believe they have uncovered wrongdoing, many of them advocated for by
Senator McCaskill," Pusateri said, "and Mr. Snowden took advantage of none of
them."

But the nongovernmental advocates say those procedures are woefully inadequate.

"Our current policies actually encourage leaks, given there is no meaningful
legal system for whistleblowing in the intelligence community," Brian said.
"There are too few legal channels for disclosing secret wrongdoing, and those
that exist do not provide authentic protections from retaliation. There are very
weak protections for intelligence whistleblowers and none at all for
intelligence contractors.

"As we've been saying for years," she continued, "the way to stop leaks is to
give whistleblowers strong protections and to curb over-classification. Instead,
no matter who occupies the White House, we have a national security state on
steroids engaging in far too much secrecy, making it harder for us to keep our
legitimate secrets, conducting massive surveillance, and punishing rather than
protecting whistleblowers."

federaldiary@washpost.com

Twitter: @JoeDavidsonWP

Previous columns by Joe Davidson are available at wapo.st/JoeDavidson.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              772 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Snowden out of sight as U.S. pressures Russia

BYLINE: Kathy Lally;Anthony Faiola

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


MOSCOW -              Edward Snowden, sought on espionage charges after bringing
secret U.S. surveillance programs to light, receded still further into the
shadows Monday as the United States strenuously called on Russia to turn him
over for prosecution.

Snowden, a former government contractor who has not been seen in public since he
was said to have arrived in Moscow on Sunday after slipping out of Hong Kong,
set off a flurry of diplomatic activity around the globe as frustrated U.S.
officials tried to interrupt his flight to asylum. The 30-year-old fugitive has
asked for refuge in Ecuador and other countries, according to Julian Assange,
the WikiLeaks founder, who said he was advising Snowden.

After reporters and airline officials said Snowden failed to board a flight from
Moscow to Havana on Monday afternoon as expected, the United States intensified
its pressure on the countries suspected of offering him possible protection. Jay
Carney, the White House press secretary, said the United States believed Snowden
was still in Moscow.

The episode, which began with embarrassing disclosures about American
intelligence-gathering, has reverberated from China to South America. As Snowden
stays one step ahead of U.S. law, countries large and small are exploiting the
opportunity to demonstrate their ability to flout American will.

"We continue to hope that the Russians will do the right thing," Secretary of
State John F. Kerry, traveling in India, told NBC News. "We think it's very
important in terms of our relationship."

Russian news agencies quoted a string of careful statements from unnamed sources
who said they were powerless to intervene because Snowden remained in a transit
area of the airport and had not crossed the border into official Russian
territory.

"The Americans can't demand anything," Vladimir Lukin, Russia's human rights
ombudsman and a former U.S. ambassador, told the Interfax news agency.

Ecuadoran Foreign Minister Ricardo PatiÃ±o, who was traveling in Vietnam, read
from a letter he said Snowden had sent President Rafael Correa. In the letter,
Snowden compared himself to Army Pfc. Bradley Manning, charged in the leak of a
trove classified material passed to WikiLeaks, and said he did not believe he
would be treated justly and that he could be executed if returned to the United
States.

Assange, speaking to reporters by telephone from his sanctuary in the Ecuadoran
Embassy in London, said Snowden was with Sarah Harrison, a top WikiLeaks
lieutenant and Assange confidante who had escorted him from Hong Kong. Assange
said that Snowden was in a "safe place" and that his "spirits are high" but
would say only that he was "bound for Ecuador via a safe path through Russia and
other states."

A former contractor for the National Security Agency, Snowden has presented the
United States with a tantalizing and maddening mystery since he left Hong Kong
early Sunday local time despite a request by the United States to detain him.

Journalists in Moscow have been led on one unsatisfying chase after another
since Snowden arrived at the airport Sunday. About two-dozen of them bought
tickets to the Monday flight to Havana - costing more than $2,000 each,
round-trip - and were dismayed when the seat in Row 17 reportedly assigned to
Snowden remained empty as the plane took off. Some hoped, apparently in vain,
that he was wearing a disguise or hiding in a crew area of the Aeroflot Airbus.

With no clear information about Snowden's plans, Russian media speculated that
he would take the Tuesday flight to Havana and travel from there to South
America. Another theory had it that the Russians were having second thoughts.

Carney said U.S. authorities were "in conversations" with their Russian
counterparts regarding Snowden, who said he exposed a citizen surveillance
program that he believed violated civil liberties. President Obama, in response
to a reporter's question, said only that  the United States was "following the
appropriate legal channels and working with various countries to make sure that
all the rules are followed."

Kerry, citing widespread Internet limits and human rights issues in Russia and
China, said it was "no small irony" that Snowden was seeking cooperation from
those countries in his quest to protect civil liberties.

"I hope it's a good sign he isn't on that flight," Kerry said in the NBC
interview, "and that something else may take place. But I'm not going to
prejudge anything other than to say that obviously this is important to us. And
I hope the right thing will happen."

Kerry asserted that the United States had returned seven criminals wanted by
Russia over the past few years. But the United States has also irritated Russia
by refusing repeated requests to return Viktor Bout, convicted in New York of
global arms smuggling and sentenced to 25 years in prison last year.

Assange said Ecuador had supplied Snowden with a "refugee document of passage"
before his flight from Hong Kong, facilitating his travel to Moscow and,
presumably, beyond. Assange described the move as an initial step in the process
of seeking asylum and a necessary step given the revocation of Snowden's
passport by U.S. authorities.

PatiÃ±o, the Ecuadoran foreign minister, said his government was "in close
contact with the Russian government" but did not have specific information about
Snowden's whereabouts.

PatiÃ±o said Ecuador, which has been sharply criticized for silencing
journalists at home, was considering Snowden's asylum request. He praised the
former government contractor for disclosing the surveillance program and said
Ecuador was free to exercise its sovereignty as it saw fit with regard to
Snowden.

When asked if he was concerned about damaging his nation's economic relationship
with Washington, PatiÃ±o remained adamant. "Ecuador puts its principles above
its economic interests," he said.

Correa, the Ecuadoran president, has emerged as one of the most vehement critics
of U.S. policy in the Western Hemisphere. In 2011, his administration expelled
the American ambassador in Quito to protest a cable released by WikiLeaks that
alleged that the Ecuadoran police force was rife with corruption.

kathy.lally@washpost.com

anthony.faiola@washpost.com

Faiola reported from London. Karen DeYoung in New Delhi; Juan Forero in Bogota,
Colombia; Jia Lynn Yang in Hong Kong; Philip Rucker, David Nakamura and Debbi
Wilgoren in Washington; and Liu Liu in Beijing contributed to this report.

An earlier version of this story incorrectly referred to Sarah Harrison as a
lawyer. She is a member of the WikiLeaks legal defense team, but not a lawyer.
This version has been corrected.

An earlier version of this story incorrectly referred to Sarah Harrison as a
lawyer. She is a member of the WikiLeaks legal defense team, but not a lawyer.
This version has been corrected.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              773 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 25, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Details of Snowden's Hong Kong stay emerge

BYLINE: Jia Lynn Yang;Peter Finn;Sari Horwitz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1495 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


HONG KONG - The message was blunt and was delivered Friday night by a shadowy
emissary who didn't identify himself but knew enough to locate Edward Snowden's
secret caretaker: The 30-year-old American accused of leaking some of his
country's most sensitive secrets should leave Hong Kong, the messenger said, and
if he decided to depart the authorities would not interfere with his travel
plans.

Since he had revealed himself on June 9 as the person who had turned over
classified documents to The Washington Post and the British newspaper the
Guardian, Snowden had moved between different hideaways guided by a Hong Kong
resident, according to one of his lawyers, Albert Ho. Like the emissary, the
caretaker's name has not been disclosed, but Ho said the resident "must be
well-connected."

For more than a week, the U.S. government had been pressing the government of
Hong Kong, a semiautonomous part of China, to arrest Snowden. Attorney General
Eric H. Holder Jr. placed a call to his counterpart in Hong Kong. U.S.
diplomats, the FBI and lawyers at the Justice Department all weighed in to urge
Snowden's detention.

But the newly disclosed details of Snowden's stay in Hong Kong indicate that the
authorities there, probably acting with the guidance of Beijing, didn't want him
to stay in Hong Kong for a long, messy legal process to determine whether he
would be extradited. The new information also raises questions about whether the
Obama administration could have done more to prevent the former National
Security Agency contractor from slipping away.

On the Friday that Snowden was quietly encouraged to leave, officials in Hong
Kong were asking the U.S. Justice Department for more information about its
provisional arrest warrant. Charles Mok, a Hong Kong legislator, said it
appeared that the U.S. request for an arrest warrant never made it to a judge
here. Rather, it seems to have been delayed by the administration of Chief
Executive Leung Chun-ying, who is widely viewed as being sympathetic to Beijing.

The U.S. government is facing much the same quandary now that Snowden is in
Russia, where the government of President Vladimir Putin is disinclined to
assist the United States and may be only too happy to watch Washington squirm.

U.S. officials have expressed their frustration with Snowden's elusiveness in
unusually blunt terms.

"We are just not buying that this was a technical decision by a Hong Kong
immigration official," said White House press secretary Jay Carney. "This was a
deliberate choice by the government to release a fugitive, despite a valid
arrest warrant. And that decision unquestionably has a negative impact on the
U.S.-China relationship."

There had been widespread speculation that the U.S. government would try to
detain Snowden on its own somehow. Julian Assange, the founder of the
anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks, which has been advising and supporting Snowden,
said in a conference call with reporters Monday that "the kidnapping or
incapacitating of Mr. Snowden must have been considered [by the U.S.
government]."

But former intelligence officials said a rendition operation to snatch Snowden
off the streets of Hong Kong was always a fantasy. There would be no element of
surprise, no cooperation from local intelligence officials, and a target who had
burrowed deep into the city's crowded neighborhoods.

Even keeping him under CIA or FBI surveillance would have been daunting, former
officials said, because of the public attention surrounding the case as well as
the fact that U.S. operatives are themselves under heavy surveillance in China
and Russia.

"He didn't go out," Ho said of Snowden. "He spent all his time inside, in a tiny
place."

Ho said he first met Snowden late Tuesday night, getting into a car at a
prearranged spot. Inside the car was Snowden, wearing a hat and sunglasses.

Snowden didn't speak. When they arrived at the home where Snowden was staying,
the American whispered that everyone had to put their cellphones in the
refrigerator. "Then he became very outspoken," Ho said.

Snowden was "very smart" and analytical, said his lawyer, although he didn't
seem to have anticipated just how complicated his situation in Hong Kong would
become. "I don't think he ever had a well-thought-out plan," said Ho, although
he added that Snowden seemed to have researched places where he could take
refuge.

For two hours that night, Snowden talked with his lawyers, who also included
Jonathan Man, an associate at Ho's firm, and Robert Tibbo, a refugee human
rights lawyer. To mark Snowden's birthday later that week - he turned 30 Friday
- Ho brought over a large pizza and fried chicken. There was also Snowden's
preferred beverage, Pepsi.

The prospect of being detained worried Snowden, said Ho, especially because he
would lose access to his computer, a situation that would be "totally
intolerable."

Snowden asked Ho to reach out to the Hong Kong government to get a sense of what
it was thinking.

By early Saturday morning in Hong Kong, Snowden learned of reports that he was
the subject of a criminal complaint in the Eastern District of Virginia and that
the United States had requested his arrest. There was nothing particularly
surprising about the news, but it added to his sense of anxiety, Ho said.

Snowden told his lawyer about the strange message relayed through an
intermediary that he should leave Hong Kong. He asked Ho to talk to the Hong
Kong government to see whether it would confirm the signal.

By this point, Snowden was in contact with people from WikiLeaks. He considered
flying out of Hong Kong on Saturday but balked for some reason. WikiLeaks
officials in London said they had assisted Snowden in making his formal
application for asylum in Ecuador and had also approached Iceland and "other
countries" on Snowden's behalf. They would not specify which other countries had
been contacted, nor what their responses had been.

Later Saturday, senior officials in Washington, including national security
adviser Thomas E. Donilon, signaled their impatience with Hong Kong.

The United States was also secretly taking steps to block Snowden from
traveling. Secretary of State John F. Kerry said in an interview with CNN on
Monday that "the moment the [criminal complaint] was unsealed and we knew of it,
at that point, his passport was pulled within two hours." According to law
enforcement officials, the U.S. government would not have been able to pull his
passport earlier because the charges were still under seal.

On Saturday evening, Ho said he got a noncommittal response from the Hong Kong
authorities. "There's nothing the government can say," was how he described it.

On Sunday morning, Snowden, accompanied by one of his lawyers, entered Hong Kong
International Airport. They were followed by plainclothes Hong Kong policemen as
they made their way, unmolested, through the regular departure channels.

Hong Kong officials said Snowden presented his U.S. passport although WikiLeaks
has said it had already arranged Ecuadoran travel papers for Snowden. A
WikiLeaks official joined Snowden on the flight.

The city government announced Snowden's departure when his Aeroflot flight to
Moscow had exited Chinese airspace.

WikiLeaks said Russian officials were told of Snowden's travel plans prior to
his departure from Hong Kong.

Former senior U.S. officials who served in Moscow said the United States has
little leverage in seeking cooperation on Snowden and that the Russian
government likely has more to gain by holding the fugitive and ultimately
allowing him to obtain asylum in another country.

One former intelligence official said Russian authorities were almost certain to
debrief Snowden and seize any computer files he carried into the country. The
South China Morning Post, which has interviewed Snowden, reported Monday that he
had taken a job with Booz Hamilton Allen earlier this year with the express
purpose of being assigned to  the NSA and accessing classified documents.

Fiona Hill, the co-author of a biography of Putin and a senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution, said the Russians, who have been frustrated in their
attempts to get opponents of the government extradited from the West, are likely
to let the United States "stew in its own juices."

There were contradictory reports about Snowden's exact location in Moscow on
Monday.  He failed to get on a flight to Cuba that was supposed to be the next
leg in an apparent attempt to reach Ecuador. And it is unclear whether Russia is
secretly negotiating with the United States or interviewing him before they
allow his departure.

"They don't want to waste this opportunity to extract what they can," Hill said,
"so they don't want Mr. Snowden to fly off too quickly."

jialynn.yang@washpost.com

peter.finn@washpost.com

sari.horwitz@washpost.com

Yang reported from Hong Kong. Liu Liu and Ricky Li in Beijing, Karen DeYoung in
New Delhi, and Greg Miller, Ellen Nakashima and Julie Tate in Washington
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              774 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                        June 24, 2013 Monday 4:55 AM GMT

Edward Snowden whistleblower set to fly to Cuba

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 527 words


Privacy whistleblower Edward Snowden is reportedly preparing to leave Russia as
he continues to evade US authorities, seeking asylum in Ecuador and leaving the
Obama administration scrambling to determine its next step in a game of
diplomatic cat-and-mouse.

The former National Security Agency contractor and CIA technician fled Hong Kong
and arrived in Moscow, where he planned to spend the night before boarding an
Aeroflot flight to Cuba. Ecuador's foreign minister Ricardo Patino said his
government received an asylum request from Snowden, and the anti-secrecy group
WikiLeaks said it would help him.

The move left the US with limited options as Snowden's itinerary took him on a
tour of what many see as anti-American capitals. Ecuador in particular has
rejected the United States' previous efforts at co-operation, and has been
helping WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange avoid prosecution by allowing him to
stay at its embassy in London.

Snowden helped the Guardian and the Washington Post disclose US surveillance
programmes that collects vast amounts of phone records and online data in the
name of foreign intelligence, but often sweeping up information on American
citizens. Officials have the ability to collect phone and internet information
broadly but need a warrant to examine specific cases where they believe
terrorism is involved.

Snowden has been in hiding for several weeks in Hong Kong, a former British
colony with a high degree of autonomy from mainland China. The US formally
sought Snowden's extradition from Hong Kong but was rebuffed. Hong Kong
officials said the US request did not fully comply with their laws. The Justice
Department rejected that claim, saying its request met all of the requirements
of the extradition treaty between the US and Hong Kong.

During conversations last week, including a phone call on Wednesday between
attorney general Eric Holder and Hong Kong secretary for justice Rimsky Yuen,
Hong Kong officials never raised any issues regarding sufficiency of the US
request, a justice spokesman said.

A State Department official said the United States was in touch through
diplomatic and law enforcement channels with countries that Snowden could travel
through or to, reminding them that Snowden is wanted on criminal charges and
reiterating Washington's position that Snowden should only be permitted to
travel back to the US.

The Justice Department said it would "pursue relevant law enforcement
co-operation with other countries where Mr Snowden may be attempting to travel".
The White House would only say that president Barack Obama had been briefed on
the developments by his national security advisers.

Russia's state ITAR-Tass news agency and Interfax cited an unnamed Aeroflot
airline official as saying Snowden was on the plane that landed on Sunday
afternoon in Moscow. Upon his arrival, Snowden did not leave Sheremetyevo
Airport. One explanation could be that he was not allowed; a US official said
Snowden's passport had been revoked, and special permission from Russian
authorities would have been needed.

The Russian media report said Snowden intended to fly to Cuba later and then on
to Caracas, Venezuela.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2013 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              776 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Belfast Telegraph

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

US pursues whistleblower as he seeks asylum in Ecuador

BYLINE: SHAUN WALKER ; DAVID USBORNE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 485 words


THE fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden has sought asylum in Ecuador after
arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong.

He had been in hiding in the Chinese city since disclosing a highly classified
US surveillance programme, escaping Washington''s attempts to extradite him from
the island.

Mr Snowden. left Hong Kong yesterday morning on an Aeroflot flight. A number of
sources suggested to Russian agencies that he was spending the night at a
capsule hotel at the city''s Sheremetyevo airport. He is expected to fly on to
Havana this afternoon.

The US said it planned to charge Mr Snowden with espionage on Saturday, and that
it had asked Hong Kong to hold him on a provisional arrest warrant and had set
in motion an official request for his extradition.

Hong Kong issued a statement yesterday saying the request for Mr Snowden.''s
arrest "did not fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".
Ecuador''s Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who is in Vietnam, confirmed a
statement last night by the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks, which said Mr
Snowden had sought asylum from Ecuador.

Two cars from the Ecuadorian embassy were spotted at Sheremetyevo airport,
fuelling rumours that Mr Snowden''s final destination could be the Latin
American country, whose London embassy has given shelter to Julian Assange,
WikiLeaks' ' founder. The television station Russia Today reported that Mr
Snowden had been examined on arrival by a doctor from the Ecuadorian embassy,
and the country''s ambassador to Russia, Patricio Alberto Chavez Zavala, told
reporters at the airport that he planned to have talks with Mr Snowden.

"He has arrived," a source inside Aeroflot told Russian agency Interfax
yesterday evening. "He cannot leave the terminal, since he doesn''t have a
Russian visa."

"  But Mr Snowden's possible flight to Latin America could be hampered by the
US, which has revoked his passport, according to American officials cited by
Associated Press and Reuters. The move would probably complicate his travel
plans, but would not necessarily thwart them if a senior official in a country
or airline ordered the withdrawal to be overlooked.

Reaction to Mr Snowden''s arrival in Moscow was relatively muted in Washington
yesterday, with only few exceptions.

"Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United
States, whether it is Syria, Iran, and now, of course, with Snowden," Senator
Chuck Schumer, a Democrat from New York, told CNN. "That''s not how allies
should treat one another, and I think it will have serious consequences for the
United States-Russia relationship."

Mr Snowden, who leaked secrets about US surveillance operations, was accompanied
on his flight from Hong Kong by a WikiLeaks activist, and WikiLeaks said in a
statement that Mr Snowden was heading to a "democratic nation via a safe route
for the purposes of asylum".

The organisation says it fully supports Mr Snowden.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: On the run: Edward Snowden

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BTT


                Copyright 2013 Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              778 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                          SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION

LEAKER'S MAD DASH Moscow, Havana aid Snowden Turns back on U.S., seeks asylum in
Ecuador

BYLINE: BY ADAM EDELMAN and STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With News Wire
Services

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1048 words


EDWARD SNOWDEN'S escape from the long arm of the law has turned into a
globetrotting flight for asylum that took the security leaker from Hong Kong to
Moscow with a final destination in South America.

Snowden made his getaway from China to Russia on Sunday morning with the help of
WikiLeaks legal advisers who facilitated a dialogue with Ecuador's Foreign
Ministry, the secrets-spilling organization announced.

"The American whistleblower who exposed evidence of a global surveillance regime
conducted by U.S. and U.K. intelligence agencies has left Hong Kong legally,"
WikiLeaks wrote on its site. "He is bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe
route for the purposes of asylum."

Snowden's association with WikiLeaks may suggest more information will soon be
revealed - and this time without the traditional media filtering out some
information deemed a threat to national security.

"I have great personal sympathy for Ed Snowden's position," WikiLeaks founder
and whistleblower Julian Assange told the Sydney Morning Herald Sunday from the
Ecuadoran Embassy in London, where he has been holed up since August of last
year as he fights an extradition request to Sweden to face allegations of sexual
abuse.

Dianne Feinstein, chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said she has
been told Snowden has as many as 200 documents, and another lawmaker suggested
Snowden had received asylum in Ecuador in exchange for disclosing more
information.

Snowden was expected to remain in Sheremetyevo International Airport in Moscow
while waiting for a connecting flight to Havana because he did not have a visa
to enter Russia. Ecuadoran diplomats were on hand at the airport, but it was
unclear if they were meeting with Snowden.Ecuadoran Foreign Minister Ricardo
Patino said early Monday morning that Snowden's asylum request was being
analyzed "with a lot of responsibility" and a decision would be made on grounds
that have "to do with freedom of expression and with the security of citizens
around the world."The Interfax news agency reported the 29-year-old former CIA
technician and defense contractor for Booz Allen Hamilton is set to depart for
Cuba on Monday.

The Russian agency also reported, however, that Snowden would continue on to
another Latin American country with a longstanding beef with American foreign
policy: Venezuela.

Snowden's series of leaks to The Guardian and The Washington Post beginning June
5 have triggered an ongoing debate about the tradeoffs between personal privacy
and national security.

His first leak of top-secret National Security Agency documents revealed that
the U.S. stores data on essentially all phone calls made on American soil. A
subsequent leak revealed the government has access to the servers of nine major
Internet companies through a classified program called Prism.

Further disclosures hinted at British intelligence's involvement in similar data
gathering, as well as U.S. hacking of computers in Hong Kong and China.

Snowden's hasty departure from the semiautonomous Chinese city where he'd been
in hiding since May 20 was surrounded by intrigue.

The U.S. formally asked Hong Kong authorities to arrest Snowden on charges of
theft of government property and two violations of the Espionage Act last week.

The Hong Kong government explained Sunday it had not done so because the U.S.
request "did not fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law."

A Justice Department spokesman said that Attorney General Eric Holder even spoke
directly with his counterpart in Hong Kong last week, and that issues regarding
sufficiency of the U.S. request never came up.

"We find their decision to be particularly troubling," the spokesman said.

But you didn't need a decoder ring to figure out the real reason Hong Kong
flouted the Obama administration: "(Hong Kong) has formally written to the U.S.
government requesting clarification on earlier reports about the hacking of
computer systems in Hong Kong by U.S. government agencies," the city's statement
read.

A commentary published Sunday by China's official Xinhua News Agency said
Snowden's disclosures of U.S. spying activities in China have "put Washington in
a really awkward situation."

"Washington should come clean about its record first," it said. "It owes . . .
an explanation to China and other countries it has allegedly spied on."

Snowden's U.S. passport had also been revoked, raising questions about why he
was allowed to board the Aeroflot flight, The Associated Press reported.

On Sunday talk shows, inside-the-Beltway bigwigs could only bemoan the high
school dropout's escape from the U.S. government's grasp.

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) blasted Russian President Vladimir Putin, accusing
him of "sticking a finger" in America's eye by allowing Snowden to land in
Moscow.

"What's infuriating here is . . . Putin of Russia abetting Snowden's escape. "I
believe that Putin, it's almost certain he knew, and it's likely he approved
it," Schumer said on CNN's "State of the Union."

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) scoffed at Snowden's claim of being a rights
crusader. "The freedom trail is not exactly China-Russia-Cuba-Venezuela, so I
hope we'll chase him to the ends of the Earth, bring him to justice and let the
Russians know there'll be consequences if they harbor this guy," said Graham.

The U.S. does not have an extradition treaty with Russia, but does with Cuba,
Venezuela and Ecuador.

But even with an extradition agreement, any country could give Snowden a
political exemption.

Contractor to fugitive

May 20

Snowden arrives in Hong Kong after moving out of his home in Honolulu.

June 9

Snowden acknowledges in interviews with The Guardian of London and The
Washington Post that he is the source of the NSA leaks.

June 12

Leaker tells South China Morning Post, "I'm neither a traitor nor a hero. I'm an
American."

June 23

Snowden arrives at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport aboard an Aeroflot Russian
Airlines flight and asks for asylum in Ecuador. But Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.)
says it's a ruse and that the fugitive might be headed to Venezuela.

June 24

Snowden is expected to depart for Cuba and then fly to South America. He is
expected to fly to Quito, Ecuador, where his request for asylum will be formally
processed, or to Venezuela, which has strained relations with the U.S.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ecuadoran Embassy car at Moscow airport, where Snowden arrived Sunday.
Sen. Lindsey Graham (l.) and Attorney General Eric Holder (center) were upset to
see Snowden slip away with help of Vladimir Putin. PUTIN PHOTO EPA/ANDY RAIN
GRAHAM PHOTO (AP Photo/Cliff Owen) HOLDER PHOTO Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg ASANGE
PHOTO AP Photo/Sang Tan SNOWDEN PHOTO GUARDIAN/REUTERS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


                              779 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                              SPORTS EXTRA EDITION

LEAKER'S MAD DASH Moscow, Havana aid Snowden Turns back on U.S., seeks asylum in
Ecuador

BYLINE: BY ADAM EDELMAN and STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With News Wire
Services

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1009 words


EDWARD SNOWDEN'S escape from the long arm of the law has turned into a
globetrotting flight for asylum that took the security leaker from Hong Kong to
Moscow with a final destination in South America.

Snowden made his getaway from China to Russia on Sunday morning with the help of
WikiLeaks legal advisers who facilitated a dialogue with Ecuador's Foreign
Ministry, the secrets-spilling organization announced.

"The American whistleblower who exposed evidence of a global surveillance regime
conducted by U.S. and U.K. intelligence agencies has left Hong Kong legally,"
WikiLeaks wrote on its site.

"He is bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of
asylum."

Snowden's association with WikiLeaks may suggest more information will soon be
revealed - and this time without the traditional media filtering out some
information deemed a threat to national security.

Dianne Feinstein, chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said she has
been told Snowden has as many as 200 documents, and another lawmaker suggested
Snowden had received asylum in Ecuador in exchange for disclosing more
information.

Snowden was expected to remain inside Sheremetyevo International Airport in
Moscow while waiting for a connecting flight to Havana because he did not have a
visa to enter Russia.

The Interfax news agency reported the 29-year-old former CIA technician and
defense contractor for Booz Allen Hamilton is set to depart for Cuba Monday.

The Russian agency also reported, however, that Snowden would continue on to
another Latin American country with a longstanding beef with American foreign
policy: Venezuela.

But Ecuadoran Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino hinted at Snowden's final
destination in a tweet.

"The government of Ecuador has received an asylum request from Edward J.
#Snowden," Patino wrote from Vietnam.

Snowden's series of leaks to The Guardian and Washington Post beginning June 5
have triggered an ongoing debate about the tradeoffs between personal privacy
and national security.

His first leak of top-secret National Security Agency documents revealed that
the U.S. stores data on essentially all phone calls made on American soil. A
subsequent leak revealed the government has access to the servers of nine major
Internet companies through a classified program called Prism.

Further disclosures hinted at British intelligence's involvement in similar data
gathering, as well as U.S. hacking of computers in Hong Kong and China.

Snowden's hasty departure from the semiautonomous Chinese city where he'd been
in hiding since May 20 was surrounded by intrigue.

The U.S. formally asked Hong Kong authorities to arrest Snowden on charges of
theft of government property and two violations of the Espionage Act last week.

The Hong Kong government explained Sunday it had not done so because the U.S.
request "did not fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law."

A Justice Department spokesman said that Attorney General Eric Holder even spoke
directly with his counterpart in Hong Kong last week, and that issues regarding
sufficiency of the U.S. request never came up.

"We find their decision to be particularly troubling," the spokesman said.

But you didn't need a decoder ring to figure out the real reason Hong Kong
flouted the Obama administration: "(Hong Kong) has formally written to the U.S.
government requesting clarification on earlier reports about the hacking of
computer systems in Hong Kong by U.S. government agencies," the city's statement
read.

A commentary published Sunday by China's official Xinhua News Agency said
Snowden's disclosures of U.S. spying activities in China have "put Washington in
a really awkward situation."

"Washington should come clean about its record first," it said. "It owes . . .
an explanation to China and other countries it has allegedly spied on."

Snowden's U.S. passport had also been revoked, raising questions about why he
was allowed to board the Aeroflot flight, The Associated Press reported.

On Sunday talk shows, inside-the-Beltway bigwigs could only bemoan the high
school dropout's escape from the U.S. government's grasp.

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) blasted Russian President Vladimir Putin, accusing
him of "sticking a finger" in America's eye by allowing Snowden to land in
Moscow.

"What's infuriating here is . . . Putin of Russia abetting Snowden's escape,"
Schumer said on CNN's "State of the Union."

"I believe that Putin, it's almost certain he knew, and it's likely he approved
it."

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) scoffed at Snowden's claim of being a rights
crusader.

"The freedom trail is not exactly China-Russia-Cuba-Venezuela, so I hope we'll
chase him to the ends of the Earth, bring him to justice and let the Russians
know there'll be consequences if they harbor this guy," said Graham.

The U.S. does not have an extradition treaty with Russia, but does with Cuba,
Venezuela and Ecuador.

But even with an extradition agreement, any country could give Snowden a
political exemption.

Ecuador is already giving safe haven to another self-proclaimed whistleblower,
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, in its embassy in London. Assange has been
holed up there since August of last year as he fights an extradition request to
Sweden for allegations of sexual abuse.

Contractor to fugitive

May 20

Snowden arrives in Hong Kong after moving out of his home in Honolulu.

June 9

Snowden acknowledges in interviews with The Guardian of London and The
Washington Post that he is the source of the NSA leaks.

June 12

Leaker tells South China Morning Post, "I'm neither a traitor nor a hero. I'm an
American."

June 23

Snowden arrives at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport aboard an Aeroflot Russian
Airlines flight and asks for asylum in Ecuador. But Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.)
says it's a ruse and that the fugitive might be headed to Venezuela.

June 24

Snowden is expected to depart for Cuba and then fly to South America. He is
expected to fly to Quito, Ecuador, where his request for asylum will be formally
processed, or to Venezuela, which has strained relations with the U.S.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ecuadoran Embassy car at Moscow airport, where Snowden arrived Sunday.
Sen. Lindsey Graham (l.) and Attorney General Eric Holder (center) were upset to
see Snowden slip away with help of Vladimir Putin. PUTIN PHOTO EPA/ANDY RAIN
GRAHAM PHOTO (AP Photo/Cliff Owen) HOLDER PHOTO Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


                              781 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Snowden heads for asylum in Ecuador;
America attacks Russia over 'escape'

BYLINE: Tom Balmforth; Raf Sanchez

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1,2

LENGTH: 755 words


THE fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden embarked on a new stage in his life on
the run yesterday, fleeing Hong Kong by plane to Russia and lodging a request
for asylum in Ecuador.

The former US security contractor was last night in an airport hotel in Moscow,
but was expected to travel on soon, after Ecuador's foreign ministry confirmed
that it had received an asylum request. His route to Quito may take him through
communist Cuba, which would be unlikely to heed any American requests for
assistance.

Rafael Correa, Ecuador's Leftwing, anti-American president, made a similar
asylum offer last August to Julian Assange, the founder of the WikiLeaks
whistleblowing organisation.

Mr Assange has spent the past year in Ecuador's embassy in London, where he has
claimed diplomatic immunity against extradition to Sweden on sex charges. Mr
Snowden, 30, who leaked details of classified surveillance programmes to the
media, slipped out of Hong Kong on an Aeroflot flight yesterday morning, two
days after he was charged with two counts of espionage and one of theft by the
US authorities.

He was accompanied by Sarah Harrison, a British researcher who has worked with
Mr Assange.

Shortly after he touched down at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, WikiLeaks
announced that its staff had helped Mr Snowden in arranging safe passage to
Ecuador.

"Mr Edward Snowden, the American whistleblower who exposed evidence of a global
surveillance regime conducted by US and UK intelligence agencies, has left Hong
Kong legally," WikiLeaks said.

"He is bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of
asylum, and is being escorted by diplomats and legal advisers from WikiLeaks."

Fellow passengers on flight SU213 from Hong Kong to Moscow said that when the
plane touched down, Mr Snowden climbed into a BMW with diplomatic number plates,
which drove onto the tarmac.

Cars from the Ecuadorean embassy pulled up outside the terminal building,
accompanied by Russian government cars with darkened windows and flashing
lights.

Mr Snowden's departure from Hong Kong sparked a row with the American
authorities over why he was allowed to leave while the extradition request was
still in process.

The Hong Kong government said that the original US request had failed to "fully
comply" with local law, and that the US Department of Justice had not provided
the further information that it had asked for.

A statement added: "The failure to provide sufficient information in this case
meant there was no legal basis to restrict Mr Snowden's departure."

However, Washington insisted that the request "met the requirements of the
agreement," which normally only requires for the country requesting the
extradition to provide basic details of the allegations.

The US government said it had already cancelled Mr Snowden's passport, raising
questions as to how he had been able to exit Hong Kong. Some believe that Hong
Kong let him go to avoid a drawn-out and controversial extradition battle.

A State Department spokeswoman said that the passport had been revoked as is
standard procedure. "Persons wanted on felony charges, such as Mr Snowden,
should not be allowed to proceed in any further international travel, other than
is necessary to return him to the United States," she said.

American officials expressed fury with both Russia and Hong Kong. Both Democrats
and Republicans attacked Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, for allowing Mr
Snowden to land in Moscow, even though it was not clear what legal grounds
Russia would have had to stop him.

Charles Schumer, a senior Democrat senator, accused the Russian president of
"aiding and abetting Snowden's escape".

A Justice Department spokesman said the US would "pursue relevant law
enforcement cooperation" with other countries where Mr Snowden may try to go.

The US has contacted a number of Latin American countries, believed to include
Cuba, Ecuador and Venezuela, asking them to prevent Mr Snowden from travelling
any further if he arrived in their territory.

Last night there was speculation that Russian intelligence officials were
seeking to press Mr Snowden for information before his departure.

Among his explosive claims has been that GCHQ has carried out vast amounts of
internet surveillance. In an interview with The Guardian, he described the
Cheltenham-based agency as "worse than the US".

Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the Tory chairman of the Intelligence and Security
Committee, has asked for a written report from GCHQ about the latest
allegations.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Top: the plane believed to be carrying Snowden, above left, lands in
Moscow; left, Ecuadorean cars arrive at the airport terminal

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              784 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Mirror

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

The spy who came in to the cold.. & flew off to the sun;
SNOWDEN'S ECUADOR ESCAPE WIKILEAKS HELPS WHISTLEBLOWER FLEE

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER BUCKTIN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 796 words


WHISTLEBLOWER Edward Snowden yesterday fled to Ecuador with the help of Julian
Assange's WikiLeaks.

Snowden has been hiding in Hong Kong since he went public as the man who leaked
highly confidential details about the US government's snooping programme.

Shortly after 11am yesterday, he and members of the WikiLeaks team caught an
Aeroflot flight from Hong Kong Airport to Moscow.

From there he is due to fly to Cuba today and then to Ecuador, where he has
applied for political asylum.

Sources said US President Barack Obama's administration was "incandescent" at
the news.

Last night a statement from anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks said Snowden was
"bound for a democratic nation via a safe route for the purposes of asylum and
is being escorted by diplomats and legal advisers from WikiLeaks".

Legal director Baltasar Garzon, said: "The WikiLeaks legal team and I are
interested in preserving Mr Snowden's rights and protecting him as a person.

"What is being done to Mr Snowden and to Mr Julian Assange - for making or
facilitating disclosures in the public interest - is an assault against the
people."

US authorities last week charged Snowden with theft, espionage and theft of
government property. Eac count carries a maximum 10-year jail sentence if he is
convicted.

Sources said Snowden carefully plotted his route to South America to avoid being
arrested on behalf of US authorities. It has been virtually impossible for US
citizens to visit Cuba directly since 1960.

Ecuador's foreign minister Richard Patino last night confirmed Snowden had
applied to his government for political asylum.

The country, which has already granted Mr Assange such protection, has had an
extradition treaty with the US since 1873.

However, the South American state often refuses to invoke the agreement for
people they perceive as being wanted for political reasons rather than on
criminal charges.

Once granted a visa by Ecuador, Snowden would be entitled to housing, health
care and short term food benefits - unlike its neighbouring countries.

But last night the ex-spy was delayed in Moscow as he was unable to leave
without a Russia visa. He faced spending the night in a £10-anhour capsule hotel
at the airport.

Just hours before Snowden left Hong Kong, WikiLeaks founder Mr Assange, 41,
called for more countries to offer asylum to the former intelligence worker.

The Australian, who has been holed up at London's Ecuadorian Embassy to avoid
extradition to Sweden, said the whistleblower's "ordeal is just beginning".

He said: "Two dangerous runaway processes have taken root in the last decade,
with fatal consequences for democracy. Government secrecy has been expanding on
a terrific scale. Simultaneously, privacy has been secretly eradicated."

On Saturday, the White House contacted Hong Kong to arrange Snowden's
extradition.

But the Chinese territory said the documents issued by Washington DC did not
"fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".

A spokesman said Hong Kong had requested further information from the US
government and added: "There is no legal basis to restrict Mr Snowden from
leaving Hong Kong."

The Hong Kong government yesterday said Snowden, 30, had left the country "on
his own accord for a third country through a lawful and normal channel".

But US officials last night said they withdrew Snowden's passport on Saturday
and demanded to know how he was allowed to leave without the right paperwork.

Later the Kremlin was notified of the move, but it is understood that as Snowden
had remained air-side at Sheremetyevo airport, he had not crossed any borders.

The White House told Russia there was "a strong desire to have him deported".

SECRETS

An agent for Russian airline Aeroflot said the whistleblower was travelling on a
one-way ticket with Sarah Harrison - a WikiLeaks spokeswoman and assistant to
Julian Assange.

Their flight landed in Moscow at 5.10pm local time.

Snowden had fled his home in Hawaii after exposing the National Security
Agency's Prism program which gave officials easy access to data held by nine top
internet companies, including Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Skype.

He had worked for the CIA until 2009, before joining consulting giant Booz Allen
Hamilton.

After going on the run, leaving his dancer girlfriend Lindsay Mills behind, he
was sacked from his £120,000 job on June 11.

America's extradition request came as it was reported that UK eavesdropping
agency GCHQ was able to tap into and store data from fibre optic cables for up
to 30 days, so it could be analysed under an operation codenamed Tempora.

The Cheltenham-based agency would not comment on intelligence matters, but
insisted it always complied with the law.

It was claimed the data was shared with the organisation's US counterpart the
NSA.

Voice of the Mirror: Page 12

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: LEAK GEEK Edward Snowden is wanted by the US
LOVER Lindsay Mills

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2013 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              785 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Mirror

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

The spy who came in to the cold.. & flew off to the sun;
WIKILEAKS HELPS WHISTLEBLOWER FLEE SNOWDEN'S ECUADOR ESCAPE

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER BUCKTIN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8,9

LENGTH: 818 words


WHISTLEBLOWER Edward Snowden yesterday fled to Ecuador with the help of Julian
Assange's WikiLeaks.

Snowden has been hiding in Hong Kong since he went public as the man who leaked
highly confidential details about the US government's snooping programme.

Shortly after 11am yesterday, he and members of the WikiLeaks team caught an
Aeroflot flight from Hong Kong Airport to Moscow.

From there he is due to fly to Cuba today and then to Ecuador, where he has
applied for political asylum.

Sources said US President Barack Obama's administration was "incandescent" at
the news.

Last night a statement from anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks said Snowden was
"bound for a democratic nation via a safe route for the purposes of asylum and
is being escorted by diplomats and legal advisers from WikiLeaks".

Legal director Baltasar Garzon, said: "The WikiLeaks legal team and I are
interested in preserving Mr Snowden's rights and protecting him as a person.

"What is being done to Mr Snowden and to Mr Julian Assange - for making or
facilitating disclosures in the public interest - is an assault against the
people."

US authorities last week charged Snowden with theft, espionage and theft of
government property. Eac count carries a maximum 10-year jail sentence if he is
convicted.

Sources said Snowden carefully plotted his route to South America to avoid being
arrested on behalf of US authorities. It has been virtually impossible for US
citizens to visit Cuba directly since 1960.

Ecuador's foreign minister Richard Patino last night confirmed Snowden had
applied to his government for political asylum.

The country, which has already granted Mr Assange such protection, has had an
extradition treaty with the US since 1873.

However, the South American state often refuses to invoke the agreement for
people they perceive as being wanted for political reasons rather than on
criminal charges.

Once granted a visa by Ecuador, Snowden would be entitled to housing, health
care and short term food benefits - unlike its neighbouring countries.

But last night the ex-spy was delayed in Moscow as he was unable to leave
without a Russia visa. He faced spending the night in a £10-anhour capsule hotel
at the airport.

Just hours before Snowden left Hong Kong, WikiLeaks founder Mr Assange, 41,
called for more countries to offer asylum to the former intelligence worker.

The Australian, who has been holed up at London's Ecuadorian Embassy to avoid
extradition to Sweden, said the whistleblower's "ordeal is just beginning".

He said: "Two dangerous runaway processes have taken root in the last decade,
with fatal consequences for democracy. Government secrecy has been expanding on
a terrific scale. Simultaneously, privacy has been secretly eradicated."

On Saturday, the White House contacted Hong Kong to arrange Snowden's
extradition.

But the Chinese territory said the documents issued by Washington DC did not
"fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".

A spokesman said Hong Kong had requested further information from the US
government and added: "There is no legal basis to restrict Mr Snowden from
leaving Hong Kong."

The Hong Kong government yesterday said Snowden, 30, had left the country "on
his own accord for a third country through a lawful and normal channel".

But US officials last night said they withdrew Snowden's passport on Saturday
and demanded to know how he was allowed to leave without the right paperwork.

Later the Kremlin was notified of the move, but it is understood that as Snowden
had remained air-side at Sheremetyevo airport, he had not crossed any borders.

The White House told Russia there was "a strong desire to have him deported".

SECRETS

An agent for Russian airline Aeroflot said the whistleblower was travelling on a
one-way ticket with Sarah Harrison - a WikiLeaks spokeswoman and assistant to
Julian Assange.

Their flight landed in Moscow at 5.10pm local time.

Snowden had fled his home in Hawaii after exposing the National Security
Agency's Prism program which gave officials easy access to data held by nine top
internet companies, including Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Skype.

He had worked for the CIA until 2009, before joining consulting giant Booz Allen
Hamilton.

After going on the run, leaving his dancer girlfriend Lindsay Mills behind, he
was sacked from his £120,000 job on June 11.

America's extradition request came as it was reported that UK eavesdropping
agency GCHQ was able to tap into and store data from fibre optic cables for up
to 30 days, so it could be analysed under an operation codenamed Tempora.

The Cheltenham-based agency would not comment on intelligence matters, but
insisted it always complied with the law.

It was claimed the data was shared with the organisation's US counterpart the
NSA.

Voice of the Mirror: Page 12

CHOC FULL ECUADOR, on the equator, is a major exporter of cocoa and bananas. It
is also home to the wildlife-rich Galapagos Islands

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHOC FULL ECUADOR, on the equator, is a major exporter of cocoa and
bananas. It is also home to the wildlife-rich Galapagos Islands
LEAK GEEK Edward Snowden is wanted by the US
LOVER Lindsay Mills

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2013 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              787 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                              June 24, 2013 Monday

CIA WHISTLEBLOWER SEEKS ASYLUM AFTER FLEEING HONG KONG FOR RUSSIA

BYLINE: By Keith Gladdis and Will Stewart in Moscow

LENGTH: 788 words


FUGITIVE spy Edward Snowden dramatically fled Hong Kong yesterday accompanied by
an ex-girlfriend of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange.

The former CIA technician flew to Russia hours after the White House warned Hong
Kong not to drag its feet over his extradition.

Last night he slept in a hotel at Moscow s Sheremetyevo airport. He is expected
to fly to Cuba today for a connecting flight to South America.

His final destination is now known to be Ecuador after its foreign minister
Ricardo Patino Aroca confirmed Snowden had applied there for asylum.

Assange, 41, has himself been holed up in the Ecuadorian Embassy in London for
more than a year to avoid extradition to Sweden on sex charges.

Snowden, 30, was accompanied on his flight to Moscow by British activist, Sarah
Harrison, a WikiLeaks spokesman and former girlfriend of Assange.

They travelled business class on Aeroflot flight SU213 and were met by officials
from Ecuador including its ambassador to Moscow Patricio Chavez.

He told reporters at the airport:  We re waiting for Sarah. We re going to talk
to them.  Miss Harrison, who has also worked for the discredited Bureau of
Investigative Journalism, was praised by WikiLeaks last night for  courageously
assisting Snowden.

The City University graduate went to work for WikiLeaks several years ago and
soon became known as the gatekeeper to Assange.

It was once claimed she did everything for him, ranging from organising his
diary to washing his socks.

Last year Miss Harrison was forced to pay £3,500 to the courts after she had put
up £5,000 as one of the people who provided sureties for Mr Assange s bail
conditions.

A WikiLeaks statement said yesterday:  Miss Harrison has courageously assisted
Mr Snowden with his lawful departure from Hong Kong and is accompanying Mr
Snowden on his passage to safety.

Snowden has been charged with espionage after exposing Prism - a covert project
run by US intelligence that snoops on Facebook accounts, emails and phone calls.

He has also detailed a massive electronic eavesdropping operation by Britain s
GCHQ called Operation Tempora. Snowden described it as  the largest programme of
suspicionless surveillance in human history .

The US had made a formal request to the Hong Kong government for a provisional
arrest warrant to stop him leaving the territory.

But relations cooled after Snowden claimed the US had hacked into Chinese mobile
phone companies to access millions of text messages. Beijing said it was
gravely concerned  about the allegations.

In a statement yesterday, the Hong Kong government said Snowden boarded a plane
at Chep Lap Kok airport  on his own accord for a third country through a lawful
and normal channel .

It said documentation provided by America for the arrest warrant did not  fully
comply  with Hong Kong law.

Clearly irritated, the Hong Kong government also demanded  clarification  on
hacking saying it would  follow up on the matter  to protect the legal rights of
its citizens.

In the US, security chiefs were bewildered at how Snowden had been allowed to
leave the Chinese- run territory because his passport had been revoked on
Saturday.Keith Alexander, head of the US National Security Agency said:  This is
an individual who is not acting, in my opinion, with noble intent.

What Snowden has revealed has caused irreversible and significant damage to our
country and to our allies.

Democratic senator Charles Schumer believes Russian President Vladimir Putin
approved Snowden s flight to Moscow.

He said:  Putin always seems almost eager to stick a finger in the eye of the
United States - whether it is Syria, Iran and now of course with Snowden.

He also suggested China may have had a role to play in Snowden s departure from
Hong Kong.

He added:  It remains to be seen how much influence Beijing had on Hong Kong.

As you know, they coordinate their foreign policies and I have a feeling that
the hand of Beijing was involved here.

Former Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon, legal director of WikiLeaks and lawyer for
Julian Assange, said:  The WikiLeaks legal team and I are interested in
preserving Mr Snowden s rights and protecting him as a person.

What is being done to Mr Snowden and to Mr Julian Assange - for making or
facilitating disclosures in the public interest - is an assault against the
people.

It would be ironic if whistleblower Snowden makes Ecuador his home given their
poor human rights record in the past.

President Rafael Correa has been accused of repeatedly using his country s
defamation laws to restrict freedom of speech.

Human Rights Watch also said Ecuador has used  terrorism and sabotage  laws to
prosecute cases involving protesters against mining and oil projects and
insisted cases of police brutality go unpunished.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2013 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              788 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              June 24, 2013 Monday

Edward Snowden: Shock turns to fury after whistleblower evades US net:
30-year-old slips away aboard flight to Moscow Errors made in extradition
demands, Hong Kong says

BYLINE: Tania Branigan in Hong Kong, Miriam Elder in Moscow and Nick Hopkins

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1336 words


Edward Snowden was five hours into his flight from Hong Kong, having already
been served one of two hot meals, when news of his departure to Moscow began to
electrify media organisations all over the world.

The Hong Kong authorities waited until Snowden was out of Chinese airspace
before sending out a short press release that confirmed the intelligence
whistle-blower had been allowed to leave on Aeroflot flight SU213, bound for
Russia.

The 30-year-old had not been stopped on his way to Chek Lap Kok airport, and was
allowed to slip away on a hot and humid morning, despite American demands that
he be arrested and extradited to face trial for espionage offences.

The reason?

The Americans had mucked up the legal paperwork, the authorities claimed in a
statement released at 4.05pm local time.

Hong Kong had no choice but to let the 30-year-old leave for "a third country
through a lawful and normal channel".

If the sudden "discovery" of a flaw in legal proceedings prompted sighs of
relief around the island and across the rest of China, there would have been
sharp intakes of breath in Washington and London, where diplomats and
intelligence officials had been hoping the net around Snowden was finally
tightening.

A fortnight into revelations that have embarrassed and infuriated the National
Security Agency and Britain's GCHQ, their target was on the move again, heading,
it seems, to central or south America, and potentially beyond the reach of
authorities that could try to shut him up.

The escape from Hong Kong was another audacious move from Snowden, who went to
ground a week ago and has not been seen since.

It was choreographed with the help of WikiLeaks, whose legal director is
Baltasar Garzon, the former Spanish judge who enraged the British government by
issuing an international warrant for the arrest in the UK of former Chilean
president Augusto Pinochet. "The WikiLeaks legal team and I are interested in
preserving Mr Snowden's rights and protecting him as a person," Garzon said.

Once on board the Airbus A330-300, and for perhaps the first time in two weeks,
Snowden would have been unaware of the diplomatic rows raging 40,000ft below
him, as American officials woke up to find that the former NSA contractor had
eluded them again and China reacted with indignation to his latest revelations.

The White House appears to have been caught flat-footed. On Saturday, President
Obama's national security adviser, Tom Donilon, told CBS news he expected Hong
Kong to arrest Snowden because it "has been a historically good partner of the
United States in law enforcement matters and we expect them to comply with the
treaty in this case".

Lawyers in Hong Kong thought so too, and reacted with amazement to the statement
from the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region (HKSAR).

Simon Young, a public law specialist at the University of Hong Kong, said the
decision was "a shocker".

"The US government will be irate with their Hong Kong counterparts (and) may
even question whether the Hong Kong government was acting in good faith pursuant
to their treaty obligations. I'm surprised."

Ronny Tong Ka-wah, a barrister and legislator for the pro-democracy Civic party,
said letting Snowden leave with a minimum of fuss must have been China's
preferred option. "If Beijing was to refuse to surrender Snowden, that might
harm Sino-US relations. On the other hand, if Beijing was to allow Snowden to
surrender, it might well be subject to criticism both here in Hong Kong and in
European countries making noises about the conduct of the US."

The formal response from the US department of justice was measured. "We will
continue to discuss this matter with Hong Kong and pursue relevant law
enforcement co-operation with other countries where Mr Snowden may be attempting
to travel," a statement said.

But on Capitol Hill there was undisguised fury, particularly when it emerged
that Snowden appeared to be intending to leave Moscow for Cuba, and then
possibly Venezuela or Ecuador.

"Every one of those nations is hostile to the United States," fumed Mike Rogers,
chair of the House intelligence committee. "The US government must exhaust all
legal options to get him back. When you think about what he says he wants and
what his actions are, it defies logic."

Democrat senator Charles Schumer said Russia's president, Vladimir Putin,
"always seems almost eager to stick a finger in the eye of the United States,
whether it is Syria, Iran and now, of course, with Snowden".

General Keith Alexander, director of the NSA, was withering too. "(Snowden) is
clearly an individual who's betrayed the trust and confidence we had in him.
This is an individual who is not acting, in my opinion, with noble intent."

The row overshadowed further revelations about the scope of US spying
activities. Snowden left Hong Kong reeling after disclosing to the South China
Morning Post that the NSA had targeted Chinese phone companies in a mass trawl
of texts and phone calls.

After years of being condemned by Washington for industrial-scale stealing and
spying in cyberspace, Beijing seized the opportunity to hit back, while swerving
around awkward questions about Snowden himself.

The official Xinhua news agency said the revelations had "put Washington in a
really awkward situation. Washington should come clean about its record first.
The United States, which has long been trying to play innocent as a victim of
cyber attacks, has turned out to be the biggest villain in our age."

In Moscow, various welcoming parties gathered at Terminal F of Sheremetyevo
international airport in anticipation of Snowden's arrival. The biggest
comprised reporters from the world's media, who assembled airside to greet the
US fugitive and his travelling companion, Sarah Harrison, who works for
WikiLeaks.

Neither of them emerged into the public lounges, provoking a new round of
conspiracy theories and rumours about where they might have gone.

Russian security vehicles surrounded the plane when it landed, while
plain-clothed Russian agents trawled the terminal, deflecting questions about
which state agency they represented by pretending to be businessmen from Munich
and journalists from state-run NTV.

Then a Venezuelan contingent was said to be there, fuelling speculation that
Snowden was being whisked away to the country's embassy in Moscow, and his final
destination was Caracas.

But by early evening it appeared Snowden had not left the airport at all, and
Quito was a more likely final destination. The Ecuadorian foreign minister,
Ricardo Patino, on an official visit to Vietnam, tweeted that Snowden had sought
political asylum in his country.

An Aeroflot source quoted by Interfax said Snowden had taken a small overnight
"capsule" room at a hotel in terminal E.

"He has arrived. He cannot leave the terminal, since he doesn't have a Russian
visa," the source was quoted as saying.

The appearance at the airport of Ecuador's ambassador, Patricio Chavez, added to
the melee. The envoy appeared lost as he wandered around the terminal,
approaching a group of journalists to ask: "Do you know where he is? Is he
coming here?" A reporter replied: "We thought you did."

Before wandering off, Chavez admitted he hoped to see Snowden because "we have
an interest in knowing what is happening to him". And, perhaps, how he had got
there in the first place.

As Snowden settled in for the night, the American authorities announced they had
revoked his passport before he had got on the flight from Hong Kong, and they
hoped Moscow might intervene on their behalf.

But Russian officials have given no indication that they have any interest in
detaining Snowden or have any grounds to do so. Far from it. The foreign
minister, Sergey Lavrov, has said Russia would be willing to consider granting
asylum if Snowden were to make such a request.

Captions:

Waiting game

A car belonging to the Ecuadorean ambassador waits at Sheremetyevo airport in
Moscow, fuelling speculation that Edward Snowden would seek asylum in Quito
Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              789 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                              Correction Appended

Front: Hong Kong, Moscow, Quito?: Snowden turns to Ecuador in bid for asylum

BYLINE: Tania Branigan in Hong Kong, Miriam Elder in Moscow and Nick Hopkins

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1075 words


The intelligence whistleblower Edward Snowden will today attempt to complete an
audacious escape to the relative safety of South America after his departure
from Hong Kong aggravated already fraught diplomatic relations between the
United States and China.

In a move that appeared to bewilder the White House, Snowden was allowed to flee
Hong Kong yesterday morning and head to Moscow on a commercial flight despite a
formal request from the US to have the 30-year-old detained and extradited to
face espionage charges for a series of leaks about the National Security Agency
(NSA) and Britain's spy centre, GCHQ.

In Moscow, Snowden disappeared again, leaving the aircraft without being spotted
but pursued by the Ecuadorian ambassador, Patricio Chavez, amid speculation that
he will fly to Quito today, possibly via Cuba.

Snowden has asked for political asylum in Ecuador, the country that has also
given shelter to the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, at its embassy in
London.

In a statement last night, WikiLeaks, which has been providing legal and
logistical help to Snowden in recent days, said: "He is bound for the Republic
of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum, and is being escorted by
diplomats and legal advisers from WikiLeaks."

Snowden's escape from Hong Kong infuriated US politicians, while China focused
on condemning Washington over his latest disclosures, which suggested the NSA
had hacked into Chinese mobile phone companies to access millions of private
text messages.

Moscow was also drawn into the controversy after it emerged that Snowden's
passport had been revoked before he left Hong Kong and he did not have a visa
for Russia.

But Russia appeared indifferent to the uproar, with one official saying Snowden
was safe from the authorities as long as he remained in the transit lounge at
the city's Sheremetyevo airport.

In Washington, congressmen fulminated at the array of powers suddenly ranged
against the US. Mike Rogers, chairman of the House permanent select committee on
intelligence, railed at the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, over his attitude
to Snowden, suggesting an ulterior motive.

"I'm sure they would love to have a little bit of coffee and some conversation
with Mr Snowden," Rogers said. Democratic senator Chuck Schumer added: "The
bottom line is very simple: allies are supposed to treat each other in decent
ways, and Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the
United States."

Washington will also challenge Hong Kong over its decision to let Snowden flee.
In a statement, the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region (HKSAR) said it could
not have stopped Snowden because America's request to detain him on a
provisional warrant - filed in papers last week - did not fully comply with
legal requirements.

"As the HKSAR government has yet to have sufficient information to process the
request for provisional warrant of arrest, there is no legal basis to restrict
Mr Snowden from leaving Hong Kong," the statement said.

Yet the admission that Snowden had been allowed to leave was made five hours
after he had boarded an Aeroflot flight to Moscow, and the discovery of the
oversight came two days after the papers had been formally sent.

Last night, a US justice department official said it was disappointed that Hong
Kong authorities did not arrest Snowden, despite repeated senior level contacts
about the matter. "The US is disappointed and disagrees with the determination
by Hong Kong authorities not to honour the request for the arrest of the
fugitive."

At no point in discussions on Friday did Hong Kong raise issues regarding the
sufficiency of the US arrest request, the official added. "In light of this, we
find their decision to be particularly troubling."

Snowden, a former NSA contractor, had previously said he would stay in Hong Kong
and fight for his freedom through the courts. He had been at a safe house after
giving an interview to the Guardian revealing himself as the source who leaked
top-secret US documents.

Since then, Snowden has been in touch with WikiLeaks, which revealed yesterday
that it had been instrumental in helping him find safe passage out of Hong Kong.

Speaking to the Sydney Morning Herald from the Ecuadorian embassy in London,
Assange said: "Owing to WikiLeaks' own circumstances, we have developed
significant expertise in international asylum and extradition law, associated
diplomacy and the practicalities in these matters. I have great personal
sympathy for Ed Snowden's position. WikiLeaks absolutely supports his decision
to blow the whistle on the mass surveillance of the world's population by the US
government."

On Saturday, the South China Morning Post disclosed details of new documents
from Snowden that suggested the NSA had hacked into Chinese phone companies.

For the second time in 10 days, General Keith Alexander, the head of the NSA,
had to defend the agency's activities, and he did not deny the latest
allegations. "To say that we're willfully just collecting all sorts of data
would give you the impression that we're just trying to canvass the whole
world," Alexander said.

"The fact is what we're trying to do is get the information our nation needs,
the foreign intelligence, that primary mission. The case that Snowden has
brought up is in defending this nation from a terrorist attack. I'm confident
that we're following the laws that our country has in doing what we do."

But China's official Xinhua news agency said the revelations had "put Washington
in a really awkward situation".

"They demonstrate that the United States, which has long been trying to play
innocent as a victim of cyber attacks, has turned out to be the biggest villain
in our age," it said.

The fall-out from Snowden's leaks continued to stir the surveillance debate in
the UK, with Shami Chakrabarti, the director of Liberty, insisting David Cameron
or the foreign secretary, William Hague, should address MPs.

On Friday, the Guardian revealed GCHQ has put taps on some of the cables that
carry internet traffic in and out of the UK, and developed a storage system -
codenamed Tempora - that can keep the information for up to 30 days.

Captions:

NSA chief General Keith Alexander insisted the agency had acted with the aim of
defending the US from a terrorist attack

Journalists on the lookout for Edward Snowden show his picture to passengers
arriving at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport from Hong Kong Photograph: Sergei
Karpukhin/Reuters

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 1, 2013



CORRECTION:

* Hong Kong is a special administrative region of China, not a special
autonomous region, as we had it in an article about the intelligence
whistleblower Edward Snowden (Hong Kong, Moscow, Quito? Snowden seeks asylum in
Ecuador after landing in Russia, 24 June, page 1).

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              790 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       June 24, 2013 Monday 10:26 PM GMT

NSA Whistleblower Edward Snowden: Fugitive fails to show for flight from Moscow
to Cuba - but Ecuador's foreign minister confirms he wants asylum;
Julian Assange says Snowden is 'in a safe place and his spirits are high'

BYLINE: Shaun Walker

SECTION: FRONTPAGE

LENGTH: 904 words


At Moscow's Sheremetevo Airport, Edward Snowden slipped through the net of the
world's media like the invisible man, with the fugitive whistleblower a no-show
for the flight he was expected to take to Havana, Cuba.

Ecuador is apparently the American's final destination, with the country's
foreign minister confirming that Mr Snowden has lodged an application for
political asylum, but how he plans to reach the Latin American country remains a
mystery.

Mr Snowden has performed an impressive disappearing act since apparently
arriving in Moscow on a flight from Hong Kong, where he spent several weeks in
hiding, yesterday afternoon. Aeroflot confirmed that he was subsequently booked
onto SU150, the 12-hour direct flight to Havana, and sources even revealed his
seat number - 17A, a window seat in economy class.

As the 2pm departure time came nearer, there was a furious scramble as
journalists were instructed not to film around the Havana gate at Sheremetevo
Airport, and some even had footage forcibly wiped from their cameras. But
despite the circus, there was no sign of the man himself. Eventually, the
plane's doors were closed, and the dozens of Russian and international
journalists already on the plane realised that seat 17A was empty and they were
apparently travelling to Havana without the man they had all been chasing.

Sources at the airport thereafter gave a smorgasbord of conflicting tidbits of
information to Russian news agencies: Snowden had already left the country;
Snowden was still in the transit hotel; Snowden was now booked onto a later
Aeroflot flight to Havana.

The US has revoked his passport and Secretary of State John Kerry yesterday
spoke sharply about Russia and China potentially letting the whistleblower leave
their territory. "We don't know, specifically, where he may head, or what his
intended destination may be," said Mr Kerry during a visit to India. "It would
be deeply troubling, obviously, if they [Russia and China] had adequate notice,
and notwithstanding that, they make the decision wilfully to ignore that and not
live by the standards of the law." Russian officials brushed off Mr Kerry's
remarks, saying that after the recent passage of the Magnitsky Act, which bans
certain Russian officials from entry to the US, Moscow is in no mood to
cooperate.

But as the hours continued to pass without a confirmed sighting of Mr Snowden,
some began to wonder if Mr Snowden had ever been in Russia at all. It was not so
much a case of "now you see him, now you don't", as a case of nobody having seen
him in the first place. The only suggestions that Mr Snowden had ever been in
Russia at all had come from his flight booking from Hong Kong, and a Wikileaks
statement, that the organisation was helping Mr Snowden on his flight to "a
democratic country" via Russia.

Hong Kong authorities had said only that Mr Snowden had left for a "third
country", while passengers quizzed on disembarking the Hong Kong flight in
Moscow said they had not noticed the American onboard. It seemed plausible that
the whole story of the Hong Kong - Moscow - Havana route may have been a
smokescreen to distract people from a different travel itinerary.

Nevertheless, there is plenty of circumstantial evidence that Mr Snowden was
indeed at Moscow's Sheremetevo Airport, at least at some point. There was the
visit to the airport yesterday evening by two Ecuadorian diplomatic cars,
including the country's ambassador, who said he planned to meet with Mr Snowden.
Then there was the strong presence of the FSB, Russia's security service, around
the hotel inside the airport where Mr Snowden was supposedly staying.

Later, Mr Snowden's presence in Russia was confirmed by Ecuador's Foreign
Minister, Ricardo Patino, who gave a news conference in Hanoi, Vietnam. "As we
all know, he arrived in Russia," he said, after reading out the whistleblower's
asylum application. "Ecuador has maintained a respectful and diplomatic contact
with government of Russia." He declined to answer a question about the exact
current whereabouts of Mr Snowden, saying he had no information. He said that
the asylum application had not yet been ruled on, but used the occasion to
deliver a stinging critique of US foreign policy and the surveillance techniques
which Mr Snowden uncovered. Ecuador has already given asylum to Wikileaks
founder Julian Assange, who is hiding out in the country's London Embassy.

"In the last few days the word treason has been mentioned," he said. "But is it
the people who have been betrayed, or certain elites?"

Mr Assange staged a conference call, in which he updated the world on what he
knows of Snowden's situation. Sarah Harrison, who works for Wikileaks, is
thought to be travelling with the fugitive.

Assange said that the organisation had paid Snowden's travel and living expenses
since he left Hong Kong.

He said: "We are aware of where Edward Snowden is. He is in a safe place and his

 spirits are high. Due to the bellicose threats coming from the US
administration we cannot go into further detail at this time.

"In relation to Hong Kong Mr Snowden was supplied with a refugee document of
passage by the Ecuadoran government."

When asked if Snowden had been questioned by the Chinese authorities before
leaving Hong Kong, Assange said: "As far as I am aware that is false."

He added that there was no communication between Snowden and Russian officials
before he departed from Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              797 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                        June 24, 2013 Monday 2:04 PM GMT

Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden fails to turn up on Moscow-Havana
flight;
US secretary of State warns of 'consequences' if Russia or Hong Kong allowed
Snowden to leave with adequate notice of US extradition request

BYLINE: Shaun Walker, David Usborne, James Legge

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1077 words


The whereabouts of fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden remain a mystery today,
after he failed to turn up on the Moscow-Havana flight he was reportedly booked
on.

US Secretary of State John Kerry said it would be "deeply troubling" if Russia
or Hong Kong had allowed Snowden to leave despite adequate notice of his
department's extradition request.

Snowden sought asylum from Ecuador yesterday after arriving in Moscow from Hong
Kong, where he had been in hiding since disclosing a highly classified US
surveillance programme, escaping Washington's attempts to extradite him from the
island.

The 30-year-old spent the night at a hotel before clearing customs at the city's
Sheremetyevo Airport.

He was expected to board an onward Aeroflot flight to Havana that departed early
this afternoon. But airline staff said he hadn't boarded the flight, and an
Associated Press journalist tweeted a picture of the empty seat Snowden had been
booked into.

Kerry has said he has no knowledge of the former NSA contractor's travel plans.
Speaking at a press conference in New Delhi, he also said he would be deeply
troubled if China and Russia had prior notice of Snowden's travel plans.

He said: "It would be deeply troubling, obviously, if they had adequate notice,
and notwithstanding that, they make the decision willfully to ignore that and
not live by the standards of the law.

"There is a surrender treaty with Hong Kong and if there was adequate notice - I
don't know yet what the communication status was. But if there was, it would be
very disappointing if he was willfully allowed to board an airplane... and there
would be, without any question, some effect and impact on the relationship and
consequences. With respect to Russia, likewise."

Washington had pressed Moscow to do all in its power to expel Snowden before he
got the chance to evade prosecution in the United States for espionage.

The US said it planned to charge Mr Snowden with espionage on Saturday, and that
it had asked Hong Kong to hold him on a provisional arrest warrant and had set
in motion an official request for his extradition back to the US. Hong Kong
issued a statement yesterday saying the request for Mr Snowden's arrest "did not
fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".

Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who is in Vietnam, confirmed a
statement last night by the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks, which said Mr
Snowden had sought asylum from Ecuador. "The Government of Ecuador has received
an asylum request from Edward J. #Snowden," he wrote on Twitter. Two cars from
the Ecuadorian embassy were spotted at the airport, fuelling rumours that Mr
Snowden's final destination could be the Latin American country, whose London
embassy has given shelter to Julian Assange, WikiLeaks' founder.

The television station Russia Today reported that Mr Snowden had been examined
on arrival by a doctor from the Ecuadorian embassy, and the country's ambassador
to Russia, Patricio Alberto Chavez Zavala, told reporters at the airport that he
planned to have talks with Mr Snowden.

"He has arrived," a source inside Aeroflot told Russian agency Interfax
yesterday evening. "He cannot leave the terminal, since he doesn't have a
Russian visa."

According to American officials cited by Associated Press and Reuters, the Us
has revoked Snowden's passport. The move would probably complicate any travel
plans, but would not necessarily thwart them if a senior official in a country
or airline ordered the withdrawal to be overlooked.

Reaction to Mr Snowden's arrival in Moscow was relatively muted in Washington,
with only few exceptions.

"Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United
States, whether it is Syria, Iran, and now, of course, with Snowden," Senator
Chuck Schumer, a Democrat from New York, told CNN. "That's not how allies should
treat one another, and I think it will have serious consequences for the United
States-Russia relationship."

Mr Snowden, who leaked secrets about US surveillance operations, was accompanied
on his flight from Hong Kong by a WikiLeaks activist, and WikiLeaks said in a
statement that Mr Snowden was heading to a "democratic nation via a safe route
for the purposes of asylum". The organisation says it fully supports Mr Snowden,
who claims that he carried out his leaks because he was disgusted by the extent
of covert activity by US agencies, and made the information available in the
public interest.

US authorities say he is a criminal and want to charge him with espionage. The
government of Hong Kong said Mr Snowden had left the territory by clearing
passport control in the normal way adding that the US had not completed the
necessary paperwork in time to establish the need for a provisional arrest
warrant and thus prevent Mr Snowden from leaving Hong Kong. It also expressed
irritation at reports that Hong Kong government computers may also have been
targeted by the NSA, perhaps going some way to explain the decision to let Mr
Snowden go.

When the news of Mr Snowden boarding a plane bound for Moscow broke on Sunday
morning, the initial assumption was that he might try to seek political asylum
in Russia itself, a country that is not exactly a paragon of internet freedom
but which might have been interested in Mr Snowden as a way to hit back at the
US. President Vladimir Putin's spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said that he was not
aware of any asylum request but added that were one made, it would be reviewed
like any other application.

As Aeroflot flight 213 crossed the great landmass of Eurasia, however, it became
apparent that Moscow might not be Mr Snowden's final destination after all.
Early suggestions included Iceland, where a businessman had previously offered
to charter a jet for Mr Snowden to bring him to the island and help facilitate
an asylum application. Later, when the WikiLeaks connection and the onward
ticket to Havana became public, attention focused on Latin America.

The head of the NSA said he did not know how his agency had allowed Mr Snowden
to leave Hawaii, where until May he had been working at one of its satellite
offices, and travel to Hong Kong bearing so many state secrets that he was then
to give away..

"It's clearly an individual who's betrayed the trust and confidence we had in
him. This is an individual... [and] who is not acting, in my opinion, with noble
intent," General Keith Alexander, director of the NSA, told the ABC News
programme This Week.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              799 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       June 24, 2013 Monday 12:37 PM GMT

Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden fails to turn up on Moscow-Havana
flight;
Whistleblower leaves Hong Kong after US asks it to detain him

BYLINE: Shaun Walker, David Usborne, James Legge

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 956 words


The whereabouts of fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden remain an international
mystery, after he failed to turn up on the Moscow-Havana flight he was
reportedly booked on.

Snowden sought asylum from Ecuador yesterday after arriving in Moscow from Hong
Kong, where he had been in hiding since disclosing a highly classified US
surveillance programme, escaping Washington's attempts to extradite him from the
island.

He spent the night at a hotel before clearing customs at the city's Sheremetyevo
Airport.

He was expected to board an onward Aeroflot flight to Havana that departed early
this afternoon. But airline staff said he hadn't boarded the flight, and an
Associated Press journalist tweeted a picture of the empty seat Snowden had been
booked into.

US secretary of State John Kerry has said he has no knowledge of the former NSA
contractor's travel plans. speaking at a press conference in New Delhi, Kerry
also said he would be deeply troubled if China and Russia had prior notice of
Snowden's travel plans.

Washington had pressed Moscow to do all in its power to expel Snowden before he
got the chance to evade prosecution in the United States for espionage.

The US said it planned to charge Mr Snowden with espionage on Saturday, and that
it had asked Hong Kong to hold him on a provisional arrest warrant and had set
in motion an official request for his extradition back to the US. Hong Kong
issued a statement yesterday saying the request for Mr Snowden's arrest "did not
fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".

Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who is in Vietnam, confirmed a
statement last night by the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks, which said Mr
Snowden had sought asylum from Ecuador. "The Government of Ecuador has received
an asylum request from Edward J. #Snowden," he wrote on Twitter. Two cars from
the Ecuadorian embassy were spotted at the airport, fuelling rumours that Mr
Snowden's final destination could be the Latin American country, whose London
embassy has given shelter to Julian Assange, WikiLeaks' founder.

The television station Russia Today reported that Mr Snowden had been examined
on arrival by a doctor from the Ecuadorian embassy, and the country's ambassador
to Russia, Patricio Alberto Chavez Zavala, told reporters at the airport that he
planned to have talks with Mr Snowden.

"He has arrived," a source inside Aeroflot told Russian agency Interfax
yesterday evening. "He cannot leave the terminal, since he doesn't have a
Russian visa."

According to American officials cited by Associated Press and Reuters, the Us
has revoked Snowden's passport. The move would probably complicate any travel
plans, but would not necessarily thwart them if a senior official in a country
or airline ordered the withdrawal to be overlooked.

Reaction to Mr Snowden's arrival in Moscow was relatively muted in Washington,
with only few exceptions.

"Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United
States, whether it is Syria, Iran, and now, of course, with Snowden," Senator
Chuck Schumer, a Democrat from New York, told CNN. "That's not how allies should
treat one another, and I think it will have serious consequences for the United
States-Russia relationship."

Mr Snowden, who leaked secrets about US surveillance operations, was accompanied
on his flight from Hong Kong by a WikiLeaks activist, and WikiLeaks said in a
statement that Mr Snowden was heading to a "democratic nation via a safe route
for the purposes of asylum". The organisation says it fully supports Mr Snowden,
who claims that he carried out his leaks because he was disgusted by the extent
of covert activity by US agencies, and made the information available in the
public interest.

US authorities say he is a criminal and want to charge him with espionage. The
government of Hong Kong said Mr Snowden had left the territory by clearing
passport control in the normal way adding that the US had not completed the
necessary paperwork in time to establish the need for a provisional arrest
warrant and thus prevent Mr Snowden from leaving Hong Kong. It also expressed
irritation at reports that Hong Kong government computers may also have been
targeted by the NSA, perhaps going some way to explain the decision to let Mr
Snowden go.

When the news of Mr Snowden boarding a plane bound for Moscow broke on Sunday
morning, the initial assumption was that he might try to seek political asylum
in Russia itself, a country that is not exactly a paragon of internet freedom
but which might have been interested in Mr Snowden as a way to hit back at the
US. President Vladimir Putin's spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said that he was not
aware of any asylum request but added that were one made, it would be reviewed
like any other application.

As Aeroflot flight 213 crossed the great landmass of Eurasia, however, it became
apparent that Moscow might not be Mr Snowden's final destination after all.
Early suggestions included Iceland, where a businessman had previously offered
to charter a jet for Mr Snowden to bring him to the island and help facilitate
an asylum application. Later, when the WikiLeaks connection and the onward
ticket to Havana became public, attention focused on Latin America.

The head of the NSA said he did not know how his agency had allowed Mr Snowden
to leave Hawaii, where until May he had been working at one of its satellite
offices, and travel to Hong Kong bearing so many state secrets that he was then
to give away..

"It's clearly an individual who's betrayed the trust and confidence we had in
him. This is an individual... [and] who is not acting, in my opinion, with noble
intent," General Keith Alexander, director of the NSA, told the ABC News
programme This Week.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              802 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                               Independent.co.uk

                       June 24, 2013 Monday 10:35 AM GMT

Fugitive NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden in Moscow en route to seek asylum in
Ecuador;
Whistleblower leaves Hong Kong after US asks it to detain him

BYLINE: Shaun Walker, David Usborne

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 868 words


The fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden has sought asylum in Ecuador after
arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong, where he had been in hiding since disclosing
a highly classified US surveillance programme, escaping Washington's attempts to
extradite him from the island.

Mr Snowden left Hong Kong on Sunday morning on an Aeroflot flight bound for
Moscow. He spent the night at a hotel before clearing customs at the city's
Sheremetyevo Airport.

He is expected to board an onward Aeroflot flight to Havana that departs early
Monday afternoon.

The US said it planned to charge Mr Snowden with espionage on Saturday, and that
it had asked Hong Kong to hold him on a provisional arrest warrant and had set
in motion an official request for his extradition back to the US. Hong Kong
issued a statement yesterday saying the request for Mr Snowden's arrest "did not
fully comply with the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".

Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who is in Vietnam, confirmed a
statement last night by the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks, which said Mr
Snowden had sought asylum from Ecuador. "The Government of Ecuador has received
an asylum request from Edward J. #Snowden," he wrote on Twitter. Two cars from
the Ecuadorian embassy were spotted at Sheremetyevo airport, fuelling rumours
that Mr Snowden's final destination could be the Latin American country, whose
London embassy has given shelter to Julian Assange, WikiLeaks' founder.

The television station Russia Today reported that Mr Snowden had been examined
on arrival by a doctor from the Ecuadorian embassy, and the country's ambassador
to Russia, Patricio Alberto Chavez Zavala, told reporters at the airport that he
planned to have talks with Mr Snowden.

"He has arrived," a source inside Aeroflot told Russian agency Interfax
yesterday evening. "He cannot leave the terminal, since he doesn't have a
Russian visa."

But Mr Snowden's possible flight to Latin America could, however, be hampered by
the US, which has revoked his passport, according to American officials cited by
Associated Press and Reuters. The move would probably complicate Snowden's
travel plans, but would not necessarily thwart them if a senior official in a
country or airline ordered the withdrawal to be overlooked.

Reaction to Mr Snowden's arrival in Moscow was relatively muted in Washington,
with only few exceptions.

"Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United
States, whether it is Syria, Iran, and now, of course, with Snowden," Senator
Chuck Schumer, a Democrat from New York, told CNN. "That's not how allies should
treat one another, and I think it will have serious consequences for the United
States-Russia relationship."

Mr Snowden, who leaked secrets about US surveillance operations, was accompanied
on his flight from Hong Kong by a WikiLeaks activist, and WikiLeaks said in a
statement that Mr Snowden was heading to a "democratic nation via a safe route
for the purposes of asylum". The organisation says it fully supports Mr Snowden,
who claims that he carried out his leaks because he was disgusted by the extent
of covert activity by US agencies, and made the information available in the
public interest.

US authorities say he is a criminal and want to charge him with espionage. The
government of Hong Kong said Mr Snowden had left the territory by clearing
passport control in the normal way adding that the US had not completed the
necessary paperwork in time to establish the need for a provisional arrest
warrant and thus prevent Mr Snowden from leaving Hong Kong. It also expressed
irritation at reports that Hong Kong government computers may also have been
targeted by the NSA, perhaps going some way to explain the decision to let Mr
Snowden go.

When the news of Mr Snowden boarding a plane bound for Moscow broke on Sunday
morning, the initial assumption was that he might try to seek political asylum
in Russia itself, a country that is not exactly a paragon of internet freedom
but which might have been interested in Mr Snowden as a way to hit back at the
US. President Vladimir Putin's spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said that he was not
aware of any asylum request but added that were one made, it would be reviewed
like any other application.

As Aeroflot flight 213 crossed the great landmass of Eurasia, however, it became
apparent that Moscow might not be Mr Snowden's final destination after all.
Early suggestions included Iceland, where a businessman had previously offered
to charter a jet for Mr Snowden to bring him to the island and help facilitate
an asylum application. Later, when the WikiLeaks connection and the onward
ticket to Havana became public, attention focused on Latin America.

The head of the NSA said he did not know how his agency had allowed Mr Snowden
to leave Hawaii, where until May he had been working at one of its satellite
offices, and travel to Hong Kong bearing so many state secrets that he was then
to give away..

"It's clearly an individual who's betrayed the trust and confidence we had in
him. This is an individual... [and] who is not acting, in my opinion, with noble
intent," General Keith Alexander, director of the NSA, told the ABC News
programme This Week.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBI


           Copyright 2013 Independent Digital News and Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              807 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                 First Edition

Fugitive Snowden in Russia en route to Ecuador;
Whistleblower flees Hong Kong after US authorities demand his extradition

BYLINE: SHAUN WALKER and DAVID USBORNE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 961 words


The fugitive whistleblower Edward Snowden has sought asylum in Ecuador after
arriving in Moscow from Hong Kong, where he had been in hiding since disclosing
a highly classified US surveillance programme, escaping Washington's attempts to
extradite him from the island.

Mr Snowden left Hong Kong yesterday morning on an Aeroflot flight bound for
Moscow. He spent the night at a hotel before clearing customs at the city's
Sheremetyevo Airport.

He is expected to board an onward Aeroflot flight to Havana that departs early
afternoon today.

The US said it planned to charge Mr Snowden with espionage on Saturday, and that
it had asked Hong Kong to hold him on a provisional arrest warrant and had set
in motion an official request for his extradition. Hong Kong issued a statement
yesterday saying the request for Mr Snowden's arrest "did not fully comply with
the legal requirements under Hong Kong law".

Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Ricardo Patino, who is in Vietnam, confirmed a
statement last night by the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks, which said Mr
Snowden had sought asylum from Ecuador. Two cars from the Ecuadorian embassy
were spotted at Sheremetyevo airport, fuelling rumours that Mr Snowden's final
destination could be the Latin American country, whose London embassy has given
shelter to Julian Assange, WikiLeaks' founder.

The television station Russia Today reported that Mr Snowden had been examined
on arrival by a doctor from the Ecuadorian embassy, and the country's ambassador
to Russia, Patricio Alberto Chavez Zavala, told reporters at the airport that he
planned to have talks with Mr Snowden.

"He has arrived," a source inside Aeroflot told Russian agency Interfax
yesterday evening. "He cannot leave the terminal, since he doesn't have a
Russian visa."

But Mr Snowden's possible flight to Latin America could be hampered by the US,
which has revoked his passport, according to American officials cited by
Associated Press and Reuters. The move would probably complicate his travel
plans, but would not necessarily thwart them if a senior official in a country
or airline ordered the withdrawal to be overlooked.

Reaction to Mr Snowden's arrival in Moscow was relatively muted in Washington
yesterday, with only few exceptions.

"Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United
States, whether it is Syria, Iran, and now, of course, with Snowden," Senator
Chuck Schumer, a Democrat from New York, told CNN. "That's not how allies should
treat one another, and I think it will have serious consequences for the United
States-Russia relationship."

Mr Snowden, who leaked secrets about US surveillance operations, was accompanied
on his flight from Hong Kong by a WikiLeaks activist, and WikiLeaks said in a
statement that Mr Snowden was heading to a "democratic nation via a safe route
for the purposes of asylum". The organisation says it fully supports Mr Snowden,
who claims he carried out his leaks because he was disgusted by the extent of
covert activity by US agencies, and made the information available in the public
interest.

US authorities say he is a criminal and want to charge him with espionage. The
government of Hong Kong said Mr Snowden had left the territory by clearing
passport control in the normal way, adding that the US had not completed the
necessary paperwork in time to establish the need for a provisional arrest
warrant and thus prevent Mr Snowden from leaving Hong Kong. It also expressed
irritation at reports that Hong Kong government computers may also have been
targeted by the NSA.

When the news of Mr Snowden boarding a plane bound for Moscow broke yesterday
morning, the initial assumption was that he might try to seek political asylum
in Russia itself, a country that is not exactly a paragon of internet freedom
but which might have been interested in Mr Snowden as a way to hit back at the
US. President Vladimir Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said he was not aware
of any asylum request but added that were one made, it would be reviewed like
any other.

As Aeroflot flight 213 crossed the great landmass of Eurasia, however, it became
apparent that Moscow might not be Mr Snowden's final destination after all.
Early suggestions included Iceland, where a businessman had previously offered
to charter a jet to bring him to the island and help facilitate an asylum
application. Later, when the WikiLeaks connection and the onward ticket to
Havana became public, attention focused on Latin America.

The head of the NSA said he did not know how his agency had allowed Mr Snowden
to leave Hawaii, where he had been working until May at one of its satellite
offices, and travel to Hong Kong bearing so many state secrets.

"It's clearly an individual who's betrayed the trust and confidence we had in
him??? [and] who is not acting, in my opinion, with noble intent," General Keith
Alexander, director of the NSA, told the ABC News programme This Week.

SNOWDEN

A MAN ON THE RUN

1 HAWAII

Snowden tells his bosses at Booz Allen in Hawaii that he needs some time off,
offers a vague excuse to his girlfriend, and flies to Hong Kong on 20 May

2 HONG KONG

Went public on 9 June, three days after The Guardian published its first story
on his leaks, saying he doesn't "want to live in a world where everything I do
and say is recorded." Then he disappeared once more in Hong Kong

3 RUSSIA

With the Hong Kong government under pressure from the US to extradite him to
face espionage charges, Snowden flies to Moscow yesterday. Wikileaks says it
helped arrange the travel papers and safe exit

4 ECUADOR?

Initial reports suggest Snowden may fly on to either Cuba or Venezuela, but
Wikileaks later stated that Snowden had applied for asylum in Ecuador, a country
that has also assisted Wikileaks founder Julian Assange

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2013 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              808 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                              June 24, 2013 Monday

Whistleblower expected to seek asylum in Ecuador after fleeing Hong Kong;
Edward Snowden arrives in Moscow and thought likely to fly to Quito today

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 651 words


TANIA BRANIGAN in Hong Kong,

MIRIAM ELDER in Moscow and NICK HOPKINS

The intelligence whistleblower Edward Snowden will today attempt to complete an
audacious escape to the relative safety of South America after his departure
from Hong Kong escalated already fraught diplomatic relations between the United
States and China.

In a move that appeared to bewilder the White House, Mr Snowden was allowed to
flee Hong Kong yesterday morning and head to Moscow on a commercial flight
despite a formal request from the US to have the 30-year-old detained and
extradited to face espionage charges for a series of leaks about the National
Security Agency (NSA) and Britain's spy centre, GCHQ.

Arriving in Moscow, Mr Snowden disappeared again, leaving the aircraft without
being spotted, but being pursued by the Ecuadorian ambassador, Patricio ChÃ¡vez,
amid speculation he will fly to Quito today, possibly via Cuba.

Mr Snowden has asked for political asylum in Ecuador, the country that has also
given shelter to the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, at its embassy in
London.

Bound for EcuadorIn a statement last night, WikiLeaks, which has been providing
legal and logistical help to Mr Snowden in recent days, said: "He is bound for
the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum, and is
being escorted by diplomats and legal advisers from WikiLeaks."  Ecuadorian
foreign minister Ricardo Patino, visiting Vietnam, tweeted: "The Government of
Ecuador has received an asylum request from Edward J. # Snowden."

Mr Snowden's escape from Hong Kong infuriated US politicians, while China
focused on condemning Washington over his latest disclosures, which suggested
the NSA had hacked into Chinese mobile phone companies to access millions of
private text messages.

Passport revokedMoscow was also drawn into the controversy after it emerged that
Mr Snowden's passport had been revoked before he left Hong Kong and he did not
have a visa for Russia. But Russia appeared indifferent to the uproar, with one
official saying Mr Snowden was safe from the authorities as long as he remained
in the transit lounge at the city's Sheremetyevo airport.

In Washington, congressmen fulminated at the array of powers suddenly ranged
against the US. Mike Rogers, chairman of the House permanent select committee on
intelligence, railed at Vladimir Putin over his attitude to Mr Snowden,
suggesting an ulterior motive.

"I'm sure they would love to have a little bit of coffee and some conversation
with Mr Snowden," Mr Rogers said. Democratic senator Chuck Schumer added: "The
bottom line is very simple: allies are supposed to treat each other in decent
ways, and Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the
United States."

Washington will also challenge Hong Kong over its decision to let Snowden flee.

In a statement, the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region (HKSAR) said it could
not have stopped Snowden because America's request to detain him on a
provisional warrant - filed in papers last week - did not fully comply with
legal requirements.

'No legal basis'"As the HKSAR government has yet to have sufficient information
to process the request for provisional warrant of arrest, there is no legal
basis to restrict Mr Snowden from leaving Hong Kong," the statement said. Yet
the admission that Mr Snowden had been allowed to leave was made five hours
after he had boarded an Aeroflot flight to Moscow, and the discovery of the
oversight came two days after the papers had been formally sent.

Mr Snowden, a former NSA contractor, had previously said he would stay in Hong
Kong and fight for his freedom through the courts. He had been at a safe house
after giving an interview to the Guardian revealing himself as the source who
leaked top-secret US documents.   WikiLeaks revealed yesterday that it had been
instrumental in helping him find safe passage out of Hong Kong. - (Guardian
service)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              809 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      June 24, 2013 Monday 11:18 AM GMT+4

Russian press review-2

LENGTH: 612 words


Snowden case may aggravate Russia-U.S. relations

On Sunday former U.S. spy agency contractor Edward Snowden accused of espionage
arrived in Moscow from Hong Kong to fly through Cuba to Ecuador, where he will
be granted political asylum. American senators have already warned Russians that
their actions will not remain unanswered. Meanwhile, the Hong Kong government
said Snowden left "on his own accord for a third country through a lawful and
normal channel."

Moskovsky Komsomolets recalled that Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino
said Snowden had sought asylum in his country, which is ready to consider his
request. Earlier Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said if Snowden asks for
political asylum in Russia, Moscow will consider his request.

Edward Snowden has been hiding at least for three weeks in Hong Kong, from where
he disclosed U.S. secret services' surveillance operations, backing his
information with documents he had taken from the U.S. National Security Agency
and the Central Intelligence Service.

Snowden's main consultant is the founder of the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks,
Julian Assange, who has been hiding in the Ecuadorian Embassy in London for a
year now. He proposed Edward Snowden to ask for asylum in Ecuador or in Russia.
On Sunday evening Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino wrote in his
Twitter blog that "the country's government has received Edward Snowden's
request for political asylum."

Later it became known that Snowden left for Moscow, from where he should take an
Aeroflot SU 150 flight to Cuba and further to Venezuela. Snowden was accompanied
by Sarah Harrison, a British legal researcher working for WikiLeaks. The
Kommersant business daily wrote that according to some information, the former
spy agent was taken by a car of the Ecuadorian Embassy directly from the
gangway.

"Snowden cannot be taken from the airport even by a car with diplomatic plates,
as he had neither ordinary nor diplomatic visa," the source said. He said while
waiting for a flight to Cuba Snowden might have spent night at a capsule hotel
located in Sheremetyevo Terminal E transit zone.

Moscow's joining the process of granting political asylum to Snowden may cause a
new aggravation of relations between the United States and Russia, Kommersant
wrote. U.S. influential senator warned on Sunday that the U.S. secret services
"will chase Snowden to the ends of the earth, bring him to justice and let the
Russians know there will be consequences if they harbor this guy."

Moscow takes these accusations and reproaches calmly and does not fear a new
conflict with the United States. The head of the State Duma international
affairs committee, Alexei Pushkov, said the United States has not thought of any
possible consequences, when it eavesdropped on conversations of then Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev at the G20 summit in London in 2009 and "does not
think of any conflict situations, when their spy disguised in wig is caught
red-handed when he tries to recruit to the CIS a Russian secret officer."

Experts interviewed by the Izvestiya daily believe that Snowden's flight to
Moscow was coordinated with the Russian authorities and secret services. The
president of the International Counterterrorism Training Association, Iosif
Linder, said the fact that Edward Snowden found himself onboard Aeroflot's
plane, which is under the international laws considered as the territory of
Russia, proves that he coordinated his flight with the Russian authorities and
secret services in advance.

"In principle what Snowden had made public is the news for ordinary residents.
Special services know this information even without this," Linder said.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              810 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                   ITAR-TASS

                      June 24, 2013 Monday 05:30 PM GMT+4

Ecuador stays in contact with Russia over Snowden presence in Moscow

LENGTH: 321 words

DATELINE: HANOI June 24


- Ecuador is considering the issue of granting political asylum to former CIA
officer Edward Snowden and stays in contact with Russia over his presence in
Moscow, Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino told a press conference in
Hanoi.

Snowden is in Moscow at present, Patino said.

The minister did not say when an answer would be given to Snowden's application.
He only noted that the issue would be settled in accordance with the
constitution of Ecuador.

Edward Snowden remains in the transit zone at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, an
airport security source told Itar-Tass.

Snowden did not fly out on the Aeroflot flight to Havana and did not leave the
transit zone, he said.

Snowden was expected to take the flight to Havana on Monday, and from Havana to
fly to a Latin American country that will agree to grant political asylum to
him. Ecuador is among such countries.

The Aeroflot airliner has flown out for Havana from Sheremetyevo without him.
The plane took off at 14:45 Moscow time. Reporters who were on duty at the
airport said they did not see him boarding, and passengers who took their seats
aboard the plane also said they did not see him. According to earlier reports,
Snowden was registered for the flight. However, he did not appear in the plane.
The liner took off 40 minutes later than scheduled.

Thirty-year-old Snowden was a technical specialist working at the CIA. Recently
he made public information about two top secret programmes of the U.S. National
Security Agency that tapped telephone calls and various kinds of communication
through the Internet in the United States. Snowden worked at one of major
American consulting companies in Hawaii. He worked for the National Security
Agency there.

Snowden escaped to Hong Kong, from where he flew to Moscow on Sunday.

Diplomatic sources in Moscow confirmed Snowden did not receive a Russian visa
and he was expected to wait for the next flight at the airport.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                      Copyright 2013 ITAR-TASS News Agency
                              All Rights Reserved


                              811 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                  Home Edition

Snowden hopscotches globe, staying just out of U.S. reach

BYLINE: Richard A. Serrano and Sergei L. Loiko

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1458 words

DATELINE:  MOSCOW


The hunt for Edward Snowden stretched around the globe Sunday as the 30-year-old
leaker of U.S. classified material flew out of Hong Kong under cover of
darkness, dropped into the protective embrace of Russia and made plans to
hopscotch through Cuba and Venezuela to eventual asylum in Ecuador.

His stealthy movements, aided by the anti-secrecy WikiLeaks organization and its
high-powered lawyers, played out like an international game of Where's Waldo.
The American citizen -- a traitor to some and a folk hero to others -- kept a
step ahead of his government, which has charged him with violating the Espionage
Act and revoked his U.S. passport in an effort to bring him to ground.

In his rush to elude arrest, the onetime low-level computer analyst appeared to
be showing up the most powerful national security apparatus in the world, just
as his campaign to expose vast U.S. surveillance programs had embarrassed the
Obama administration by contradicting the president's pledge to run a government
with an "unprecedented level of openness."

With the collusion of several governments, Snowden managed over the weekend to
make Washington appear stumped in its attempts to extradite the former National
Security Agency contract worker for leaking details of secret phone and Internet
eavesdropping programs.

The drama afforded nations with histories of being thorns in the side of the
U.S. a rare and low-cost opportunity to frustrate the administration.

Nevertheless, administration officials remained confident that, despite not
succeeding in having Snowden detained in Hong Kong, they will eventually catch
their man. "The belt will tighten. We will get him," said one Department of
Justice official, speaking anonymously because of the delicate matter of
handling both a criminal case and an awkward game of multinational diplomacy.

President Obama is not the only party to the drama caught in the contradictory
politics of secrecy. Snowden has portrayed himself as a campaigner for openness
and freedom of the press. However, Ecuador, his apparent haven in South America,
has had a checkered history on that score. This month, the Ecuadorean Congress,
at President Rafael Correa's insistence, passed a law that prohibits news
organizations from publishing classified or confidential government documents or
material from personal documents without their owner's permission.

Any hopes that Justice Department and national security officials might have had
for gaining a helping hand from Moscow appeared frustrated Sunday by indications
that Russia, like Hong Kong, did not appear to want to keep Snowden for long.

"Moscow sees his presence as a big unasked-for headache and pretends he is not
here," said Andrei Kortunov, president of the New Eurasia Foundation, a Moscow
think tank. "Moscow is being very cautious as on the one hand it doesn't want to
further damage their relations with the United States and on the other, it
doesn't want to appear [to be] bowing to Americans."

U.S. prosecutors charged Snowden on a criminal complaint filed under seal June
14, accusing him of unauthorized communication of national defense information
and providing U.S. classified intelligence to an unauthorized person, both
Espionage Act violations, as well as theft of government property. He faces 30
years in prison, and potentially much more if federal prosecutors follow through
with a grand jury indictment in the next 60 days, which they plan to do.

"The chase is on," said Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), who agreed that time
was of the essence, especially since Snowden has suggested that he is on the
brink of revealing more classified secrets.

"I wanna get him caught and brought back for trial," the chairwoman of the
Senate Intelligence Committee said on CBS' "Face the Nation." "And I think we
need to know exactly what he has. He could have a lot, lot more. It may really
put people in jeopardy."

Washington was trying to anticipate Snowden's moves and halt his dash toward a
safe harbor.

"Persons wanted on felony charges, such as Mr. Snowden, should not be allowed to
proceed in any further international travel, other than is necessary to return
him to the United States," said Jen Psaki, spokeswoman at the State Department.

The Justice Department's spokeswoman, Nanda Chitre, said, "We will pursue
relevant law enforcement cooperation with other countries where Mr. Snowden may
be attempting to travel."

The prosecution of Snowden became public Friday evening when the Justice
Department unsealed the week-old criminal complaint. It was at that moment, said
one Justice Department official, that discussions between the United States and
Hong Kong went flat: The spying charges "raised political concerns and put a new
dimension on things," he said.

Snowden, the official said, was never "detained" in Hong Kong or held "under any
kind of police protection" while he was residing at an undisclosed safe house.
Crucially for the U.S., there was a delay in getting Hong Kong to respond to the
criminal warrant and arranging an extradition hearing.

Top officials in Hong Kong also needed to brief the Chinese government in
Beijing about detaining Snowden for extradition to the United States.

"There was a lot of red tape, but we thought it would get done," the official
said.

The U.S. had expected Hong Kong to follow through on Washington's request to
deliver Snowden over for prosecution, according to another Justice Department
official. On Wednesday, Atty. Gen. Eric H. Holder Jr. telephoned his counterpart
in Hong Kong, Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen, "stressing the importance of
the matter and urging Hong Kong to honor our request for Snowden's arrest," the
official said.

Also working their channels were U.S. State De- partment and consulate officials
in the Chinese territory, as well as FBI agents talking to their colleagues
there.

But when the criminal complaint was made public, Hong Kong asked for more
information about the charges and for "evidence" against Snowden. The official
said the U.S. "was in the process of responding ... when we learned that Hong
Kong authorities had allowed the fugitive to leave." The final response of the
city's administration to the U.S. was that it "found our request insufficient,"
he said.

Officials in the Chinese territory said Sunday that without "sufficient
information to process the request for provisional warrant of arrest, there is
no legal basis to restrict Mr. Snowden from leaving Hong Kong."

Snowden landed Sunday afternoon at Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow. He was taken
by car under some sort of Russian protection to what the U.S. official said was
a "comfort zone" in the airport transit area.

A Russian Foreign Ministry official, also speaking on condition of anonymity,
said Snowden indicated he had planned to leave Monday for Caracas, Venezuela,
via Havana. But then the Ecuadorean ambassador to Russia, apparently at
Snowden's request, arrived at the airport. With the ambassador's car idling out
front, the two men launched into private discussions.

Snowden then said he would seek political asylum in Ecuador, the Russian Foreign
Ministry official said, and booked a seat on a Monday flight to Havana aboard
Aeroflot, with plans to push on to Caracas and then to Quito.

Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino said simply in a brief Twitter
message: "The government of Ecuador has received an asylum request from Edward
Snowden."

Snowden may have chosen Ecuador because WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange has
been claiming asylum in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London for a year. Assange is
trying to avoid facing criminal charges of sexual assault in Sweden, which he
says are politically motivated, and possible criminal prosecution in the U.S.
for publishing classified material allegedly leaked by Army Pfc. Bradley
Manning, who is being court-martialed this summer at Ft. Meade, Md.

Now WikiLeaks has come to the aid of Snowden.

"He is bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of
asylum, and is being escorted by diplomats and legal advisors from WikiLeaks,"
the organization said in a statement.

WikiLeaks quoted a prominent former Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon, who is now
the organization's legal director and Assange's attorney, as saying: "What is
being done to Mr. Snowden and to Mr. Julian Assange -- for making or
facilitating disclosures in the public interest -- is an assault against the
people."

--

richard.serrano@latimes.com

sergei.loiko@latimes.com

Serrano reported from Washington and Loiko from Moscow. Times staff writers Ken
Dilanian, Kathleen Hennessey, Paul Richter and David G. Savage in Washington,
and special correspondents Chris Kraul in Bogota, Colombia, and Pablo Jaramillo
Viteri in Quito, Ecuador, contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: NEWS THAT former NSA contractor Edward Snowden flew to Moscow
from Hong Kong on Sunday drew a crowd of journalists to Sheremetyevo airport in
the Russian capital. Snowden, 30, has been charged with violating the U.S.
Espionage Act.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Igor Kharitonov European Pressphoto Agency

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              812 of 985 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 24, 2013 Monday
                                  Home Edition

A quandary averted for China;
With Snowden out of Hong Kong, Beijing avoids a protracted battle with the U.S.

BYLINE: Julie Makinen and Paul Richter

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE:  BEIJING


By allowing, or perhaps pushing, Edward Snowden to leave Hong Kong, Chinese
officials managed to show they would not kowtow to U.S. demands while still
bringing a hasty end to an incident that threatened to strain ties with
Washington for months or even years.

Given the former National Security Agency contractor's allegation that U.S.
surveillance and hacking activities had targeted facilities in mainland China
and Hong Kong, popular and official opposition to extraditing Snowden to the
U.S. had been building here for weeks.

China's move, analysts said, also reflected a calculus that whatever short-term
anger Snowden's departure precipitated in Washington, it would be preferable to
a protracted battle had he stayed in Hong Kong and fought extradition or applied
for asylum.

Officially, authorities in Beijing were keeping an arm's-length distance from
Sunday's developments in Hong Kong, a former British colony of 7 million that
returned to Chinese rule in 1997 but retains a separate political and legal
structure that guarantees greater civil liberties than on the mainland. Hong
Kong has a treaty with the U.S. that allows for extraditions, although mainland
officials are allowed to intervene in cases that they determine concern foreign
policy or national defense.

"We have noted relevant reports but are not aware of the specifics," Chinese
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said in Beijing on Sunday. "We will
continue to follow its development. Hong Kong is ruled by law.... The central
government always respects [Hong Kong's] handling of affairs in accordance with
law."

But Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said
it was "highly likely" that Beijing authorities had quietly instructed Hong Kong
officials not to give up Snowden.

"The decision was basically made in Beijing not to send him to the U.S.," Lam
said. "Hong Kong was seeking a politically expedient way out before the legal
procedures started. What the Hong Kong government said is that they received
Washington's request [to arrest Snowden] but were seeking more info. But they
haven't gotten it. So the pretext was that they have no legal reason to detain
him."

Simon N.M. Young, a law professor at the University of Hong Kong who has been
closely monitoring Snowden's case, called Hong Kong's decision to allow the
departure "a shocker."

"I thought he was going to stay and fight it out," Young said. "The U.S.
government will be irate with their Hong Kong counterparts. They may even
question whether the Hong Kong government was acting in good faith pursuant to
their treaty obligations."

In Washington, White House and State Department officials declined to comment, a
sign of the sensitivity of relations between the U.S. and China.

Jeffrey Bader, a senior White House advisor on China in President Obama's first
term, speculated that there would not be a conflict between the U.S. and Beijing
over the move, because China had limited its role by not offering asylum to
Snowden and not seeking to debrief him on the NSA snooping.

Bader was skeptical that the decision to allow Snowden to leave was made in
Beijing.

Hong Kong authorities "have been pretty firm about protecting the autonomy of
their decision making," said Bader, who is now with the Brookings Institution.
He speculated that Hong Kong probably decided to allow Snowden's departure
because it wanted to avoid being caught in an extended legal battle.

They "were probably happy to get this off their plate," he said.

Cheng Li, another China scholar at Brookings, said that while things could
change, for now, both sides would be relieved. He compared the case to that of a
famous Chinese democracy activist who sought refuge in the U.S. Embassy in
Beijing during the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989.

"Based on what we know, there won't be prolonged diplomatic tensions, like what
happened with Fang Lizhi in 1989," Li said. "He was hiding in the U.S. Embassy
in Beijing for a year, and that caused tremendous tensions."

Opposition to extraditing Snowden from Hong Kong had been mounting with each new
revelation about NSA surveillance. A public opinion poll last weekend in Hong
Kong found about half of respondents did not favor sending him back to the
United States for prosecution.

Although officials in Beijing kept their comments on Snowden to a minimum, an
editorial last week in the Global Times, a newspaper with close ties to the
Communist Party, inveighed against extraditing him, saying, "It would be a
face-losing outcome for both the Hong Kong government and the Chinese central
government if Snowden is extradited back to the U.S. Unlike a common criminal,
Snowden did not hurt anybody. His 'crime' is that he blew the whistle on the
U.S. government's violation of civil rights."

And just hours before Snowden's departure from Hong Kong became public, the
official New China News Agency published a commentary titled: "Washington owes
world explanations over spying accusations."

"The United States, which has long been trying to play innocent as a victim of
cyber attacks, has turned out to be the biggest villain in our age," the news
agency said. Before it extradites Snowden, the commentary said, "Washington
should come clean about its record."

In Hong Kong, support for Snowden hinged both on the territory's historical
status as a refuge for dissidents -- mostly from the mainland -- as well as
locals' outrage over Snowden's revelations that their supposed ally, the United
States, had been targeting the city for extensive surveillance activities.

Law Yuk-kai, director of Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor, said Sunday that he was
pleased the city government had "honored its obligation under our legal system
to allow Mr. Snowden to leave."

"Hong Kong was probably not a very good place for him," Law added. "The legal
procedures involved had certain uncertainties: First, the legal system is not
totally in our hands; Beijing has a lot to say. Second, the procedure relates to
a large number of big legal issues ... extradition legislation, refugee laws and
constitutional obligations to protect rights under the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights."

Joseph Fewsmith, a professor of international relations and China expert at
Boston University, cautioned that the Snowden case might not blow over as
quickly as some expect.

"I'm afraid that the Snowden affair will have a significant effect on Sino-U.S.
relations," he said. "We have just had a summit meeting intended to air issues
and build trust; this affair is likely to destroy whatever trust was built up.
People talk a lot about 'strategic mistrust' these days; I think it has just
been increased."

--

julie.makinen@latimes.com

paul.richter@latimes.com

Makinen reported from Beijing and Richter from Washington.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: PROTESTERS march in Hong Kong, where -- as in Beijing -- public
sentiment had been building against extraditing Edward Snowden.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Philippe Lopez AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              843 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 24, 2013 Monday

Snowden not on Havana-bound plane - sources

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL

LENGTH: 410 words


NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden was supposed to be on a 12-hour Havana-bound
airplane from Moscow on Monday, but the 30 journalists who boarded the plane
have seen no sign of him.

Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the United States for
revealing a highly classified surveillance program, was registered for seat 17A
on the Aeroflot Moscow-Havana flight, but the seat was empty when the airplane
took off Monday afternoon, RIA Novosti reported, citing its correspondent who
had boarded the plane.

Nor could Snowden be found in the plane's business class. Meanwhile, a source
close to the case confirmed to RIA Novosti that Snowden was indeed not on the
Havana-bound airplane.

According to an airport source, Snowden is still in Sheremetyevo's transit zone.

'Snowden has gone through registration, but did not physically board the plane
and has remained in the transit zone,' RIA Novosti quoted a source at
Sheremetyevo airport as saying.

Meanwhile, a Russian pilot has said that theoretically, the United States has
the right to ground an airplane carrying a wanted suspect if it is flying over
its airspace.

'Theoretically, of course, they could [demand that the plane land],' RIA Novosti
quoted the pilot as saying. 'And we would be forced to comply. Do they have the
right [in this case]? That would be a question for lawyers.'

According to Yandex.ru's maps, the flight's route goes over US territory,
specifically Florida, on its way to Havana.

Snowden left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the United
States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport officials
at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden was in the airport's
transit zone and would not be allowed to leave the premises because he did not
have a Russian visa.

Aeroflot confirmed Sunday that Snowden was registered for a Havana-bound flight
out of Sheremetyevo.

Earlier, anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of
classified US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was
'bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that
Snowden had requested asylum in Ecuador and pledged that his request would be
considered in the shortest time possible. The Ecuadorian Embassy in Moscow has
also confirmed it has no idea where Snowden is presently located, RIA Novosti
reported.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              844 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 24, 2013 Monday

Russia has no basis to detain Snowden - security source

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 365 words


The White House expects Russia to consider 'all options available' to extradite
Edward Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the United States
for revealing a highly classified surveillance program, National Security
Council (NSC) Spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said in a statement on Monday.

But Moscow showed no signs it was willing to extradite Snowden, who was staying
in the transit zone of the capital's Sheremetyevo Airport on Sunday night.

"Given our intensified cooperation after the Boston marathon bombings and our
history of working with Russia on law enforcement matters - including returning
numerous high-level criminals back to Russia at the request of the Russian
government - we expect the Russian government to look at all options available
to expel Mr. Snowden back to the U.S. to face justice for the crimes with which
he is charged," Associated Press quoted the NSC statement as saying.

Snowden, 30, left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the
United States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport
officials at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden would not be
allowed to leave the premises because he did not have a Russian visa and would
therefore only be able to fly to a third destination.

Russia's security agencies had no basis to detain Snowden on Russian soil, RIA
Novosti reported on Monday citing an unnamed security source.

'Snowden has not committed any unlawful act on Russian territory,' the source
was quoted as saying. 'Russian law enforcement has no order to detain him, so
there is no basis to do so.'

Anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of classified
US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was 'bound for
the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's foreign minister confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that Snowden had
requested asylum in Ecuador.

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino pledged that Snowden's asylum request
would be considered in the shortest time possible and that he could expect an
answer soon, according to televised remarks carried by the Latin-American
channel Telesur.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved


                              874 of 985 DOCUMENTS



                                  Moscow News

                              June 24, 2013 Monday

Russia has no basis to detain Snowden - security source

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 365 words


The White House expects Russia to consider 'all options available' to extradite
Edward Snowden, a former US intelligence contractor wanted by the United States
for revealing a highly classified surveillance program, National Security
Council (NSC) Spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said in a statement on Monday.

But Moscow showed no signs it was willing to extradite Snowden, who was staying
in the transit zone of the capital's Sheremetyevo Airport on Sunday night.

"Given our intensified cooperation after the Boston marathon bombings and our
history of working with Russia on law enforcement matters - including returning
numerous high-level criminals back to Russia at the request of the Russian
government - we expect the Russian government to look at all options available
to expel Mr. Snowden back to the U.S. to face justice for the crimes with which
he is charged," Associated Press quoted the NSC statement as saying.

Snowden, 30, left Hong Kong on a Moscow-bound plane on Sunday, a day after the
United States formally requested his extradition. Media reports cited airport
officials at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport as saying that Snowden would not be
allowed to leave the premises because he did not have a Russian visa and would
therefore only be able to fly to a third destination.

Russia's security agencies had no basis to detain Snowden on Russian soil, RIA
Novosti reported on Monday citing an unnamed security source.

'Snowden has not committed any unlawful act on Russian territory,' the source
was quoted as saying. 'Russian law enforcement has no order to detain him, so
there is no basis to do so.'

Anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks, which has released thousands of classified
US government messages, said Sunday in a statement that Snowden was 'bound for
the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum.'

Ecuador's foreign minister confirmed on Sunday on Twitter that Snowden had
requested asylum in Ecuador.

Ecuador's Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino pledged that Snowden's asylum request
would be considered in the shortest time possible and that he could expect an
answer soon, according to televised remarks carried by the Latin-American
channel Telesur.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2013 RIA Novosti
                              All Rights Reserved
